The Project Gutenberg eBook of Self-Organizing Systems, 1963, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Self-Organizing Systems, 1963

Author: Various

Editor: James Emmett Garvey

Release Date: September 13, 2021 [eBook #66286]

Language: English


Produced by: Mark C. Orton and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
             https://www.pgdp.net

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SELF-ORGANIZING SYSTEMS, 1963 ***




Transcriber’s Notes:

  Underscores “_” before and after a word or phrase indicate _italics_
     in the original text.
  Equal signs “=” before and after a word or phrase indicate =bold= in
     the original text.
  A single underscore after a symbol indicates a subscript.
  Carat symbol “^” designates a superscript.
  A bold arrow in front of a letter indicates a vector,
     e.g. ⮕M means “the vector M”.
  Small capitals have been converted to SOLID capitals.
  Illustrations have been moved so they do not break up paragraphs.
  Typographical and punctuation errors have been silently corrected.




                   SELF-ORGANIZING
                       SYSTEMS
                        1963

                     =Edited By=

                =JAMES EMMETT GARVEY=
              _Office of Naval Research
                Pasadena, California_

                      =ACR-96=

              =OFFICE OF NAVAL RESEARCH
               DEPARTMENT OF THE NAVY
                  WASHINGTON, D.C.=

    For sale by the Superintendent of Documents.
           U.S. Government Printing Office
         Washington, D.C., 20402—Price $1.50




CONTENTS


    Foreword                                              iv

    The Ionic Hypothesis and Neuron Models                 1
      —E. R. Lewis

    Fields and Waves in Excitable Cellular Structures     19
      —R. M. Stewart

    Multi-Layer Learning Networks                         37
      —R. A. Stafford

    Adaptive Detection of Unknown Binary Waveforms        46
      —J. J. Spilker, Jr.

    Conceptual Design of Self-Organizing Machines         52
      —P. A. Kleyn

    A Topological Foundation for Self-Organization        65
      —R. I. Ścibor-Marchocki

    On Functional Neuron Modeling                         71
      —C. E. Hendrix

    Selection of Parameters for Neural Net Simulations    76
      —R. K. Overton

    Index of Invited Participants                         77




FOREWORD


The papers appearing in this volume were presented at a Symposium
on Self-Organizing Systems, which was sponsored by the Office of
Naval Research and held at the California Institute of Technology,
Pasadena, California, on 14 November 1963. The Symposium was organized
with the aim of providing a critical forum for the presentation and
discussion of contemporary significant research efforts, with the
emphasis on relatively uncommon approaches and methods in an early
state of development. This aim and nature dictated that the Symposium
be in effect a Working Group, with numerically limited invitational
participation.

The papers which were presented and discussed did in fact serve
to introduce several relatively unknown approaches; some of the
speakers were promising young scientists, others had become known for
contributions in different fields and were as yet unrecognized for
their recent work in self-organization. In addition, the papers as a
collection provided a particularly broad, cross-disciplinary spectrum
of investigations which possessed intrinsic value as a portrayal of
the bases upon which this new discipline rests. Accordingly, it became
obvious in retrospect that the information presented and discussed at
the Symposium was of considerable interest—and should thus receive
commensurate dissemination—to a much broader group of scientists and
engineers than those who were able to participate directly in the
meeting itself. This volume is the result of that observation; as an
edited collection of the papers presented at the Symposium, it forms
the Proceedings thereof. If it provides a useful reference for present
and future investigators, as well as documenting the source of several
new approaches, it will have fulfilled its intended purpose well.

A Symposium which takes the nature of a Working Group depends for its
utility especially upon effective commentary and critical analysis,
and we commend all the participants for their contributions in this
regard. It is appropriate, further, to acknowledge the contributions
to the success of the Symposium made by the following: The California
Institute of Technology for volunteering to act as host and for
numerous supporting services; Professor Gilbert D. McCann, Director
of the Willis Booth Computing Center at the California Institute of
Technology, and the members of the technical and secretarial staffs
of the Computing Center, who assumed the responsibility of acting as
the immediate representatives of the Institute; the members of the
Program Committee, who organized and led the separate sessions—Harold
Hamilton of General Precision, Joseph Hawkins of Ford Motor Company,
Robert Stewart of Space-General, Peter Kleyn of Northrop, and Professor
McCann; members of the Technical Information Division of the Naval
Research Laboratory, who published these Proceedings; and especially
the authors of the papers, which comprised the heart of the Symposium
and subsequently formed this volume. To all of these the sponsors wish
to express their very sincere appreciation.

     JAMES EMMETT GARVEY
    _Office of Naval Research Branch Office
     Pasadena, California_

     MARGO A. SASS
    _Office of Naval Research
     Washington, D.C._




The Ionic Hypothesis and Neuron Models


                    E. R. LEWIS

         _Librascope Group, General Precision, Inc.
                 Research and Systems Center
                    Glendale, California_

    The measurements of Hodgkin and Huxley were aimed at
    revealing the mechanism of generation and propagation
    of the all-or-none spike. Their results led to the
    Modern Ionic Hypothesis. Since the publication of
    their papers in 1952, advanced techniques with
    microelectrodes have led to the discovery of many
    modes of subthreshold activity not only in the axon
    but also in the somata and dendrites of neurons. This
    activity includes synaptic potentials, local response
    potentials, and pacemaker potentials.

    We considered the question, “Can this activity also
    be explained in terms of the Hodgkin-Huxley Model?”
    To seek an answer, we have constructed an electronic
    analog based on the ionic hypothesis and designed
    around the data of Hodgkin and Huxley. Synaptic
    inputs were simulated by simple first-order or
    second-order networks connected directly to simulated
    conductances (potassium or sodium). The analog has,
    with slight parameter adjustments, produced all modes
    of threshold and subthreshold activity.


INTRODUCTION

In recent years physiologists have become quite adept at probing
into neurons with intracellular microelectrodes. They are now able,
in fact, to measure (a) the voltage change across the postsynaptic
membrane elicited by a single presynaptic impulse (see, for examples,
references 1 and 2) and (b) the voltage-current characteristics
across a localized region of the nerve cell membrane (3), (4), (5),
(6). With microelectrodes, physiologists have been able to examine
not only the all-or-none spike generating and propagating properties
of axons but also the electrical properties of somatic and dendritic
structures in individual neurons. The resulting observations have
led many physiologists to believe that the individual nerve cell
is a potentially complex information-processing system far removed
from the simple two-state device envisioned by many early modelers.
This new concept of the neuron is well summarized by Bullock in his
1959 _Science_ article (10). In the light of recent physiological
literature, one cannot justifiably omit the diverse forms of somatic
and dendritic behavior when assessing the information-processing
capabilities of single neurons. This is true regardless of the means of
assessment—whether one uses mathematical idealizations, electrochemical
models, or electronic analogs. We have been interested specifically in
electronic analogs of the neuron; and in view of the widely diversified
behavior which we must simulate, our first goal has been to find a
unifying concept about which to design our analogs. We believe we have
found such a concept in the Modern Ionic Hypothesis, and in this paper
we will discuss an electronic analog of the neuron which was based on
this hypothesis and which simulated not only the properties of the
axon but also the various subthreshold properties of the somata and
dendrites of neurons.

We begin with a brief summary of the various types of subthreshold
activity which have been observed in the somatic and dendritic
structures of neurons. This is followed by a brief discussion of the
Hodgkin-Huxley data and of the Modern Ionic Hypothesis. An electronic
analog based on the Hodgkin-Huxley data is then introduced, and we show
how this analog can be used to provide all of the various types of
somatic and dendritic activity.


SUBTHRESHOLD ELECTRICAL ACTIVITY IN NEURONS

In studying the recent literature in neurophysiology, one is
immediately struck by the diversity in form of both elicited and
spontaneous electrical activity in the single nerve cell. This applies
not only to the temporal patterns of all-or-none action potentials
but also to the graded somatic and dendritic potentials. The synaptic
membrane of a neuron, for example, is often found to be electrically
inexcitable and thus incapable of producing an action potential; yet
the graded, synaptically induced potentials show an amazing diversity
in form. In response to a presynaptic impulse, the postsynaptic
membrane may become hyperpolarized (inhibitory postsynaptic potential),
depolarized (excitatory postsynaptic potential), or remain at the
resting potential but with an increased permeability to certain ions
(a form of inhibition). The form of the postsynaptic potential in
response to an isolated presynaptic spike may vary from synapse to
synapse in several ways, as shown in Figure 1. Following a presynaptic
spike, the postsynaptic potential typically rises with some delay to
a peak value and then falls back toward the equilibrium or resting
potential. Three potentially important factors are the delay time
(synaptic delay), the peak amplitude (spatial weighting of synapse),
and the rate of fall toward the equilibrium potential (temporal
weighting of synapse). The responses of a synapse to individual spikes
in a volley may be progressively enhanced (facilitation), diminished
(antifacilitation), or neither (1), (2), (7), (8). Facilitation may be
in the form of progressively increased peak amplitude, or in the form
of progressively decreased rate of fall (see Figure 2). The time course
and magnitude of facilitation or antifacilitation may very well be
important synaptic parameters. In addition, the postsynaptic membrane
sometimes exhibits excitatory or inhibitory aftereffects (or both) on
cessation of a volley of presynaptic spikes (2), (7); and the time
course and magnitude of the aftereffects may be important parameters.
Clearly, even if one considers the synaptic potentials alone, he is
faced with an impressive variety of responses. Examples of the various
types of postsynaptic responses may be found in the literature, but for
purposes of the present discussion the idealized wave forms in Figure 2
will demonstrate the diversity of electrical behavior with which one is
faced.

[Illustration: A. EXCITATORY POSTSYNAPTIC POTENTIAL FROM APLYSIA (SEE
REF. 2)]

[Illustration: B. EXCITATORY POSTSYNAPTIC POTENTIAL FROM PANULIRUS (SEE
REF. 1)]

[Illustration: C. EXCITATORY POSTSYNAPTIC POTENTIAL FROM MAMMALIAN
MOTONEURONE (SEE REF. 24)]

[Illustration: D. PRESYNAPTIC SPIKE

Figure 1—Excitatory postsynaptic potentials in response to a single
presynaptic spike]

[Illustration: A. TEMPORAL FACILITATION]

[Illustration: B. AMPLITUDE FACILITATION]

[Illustration: C. ANTIFACILITATION]

[Illustration: D. INHIBITORY POSTSYNAPTIC POTENTIALS EXHIBITING
BIPHASIC REBOUND]

[Illustration: E. PRESYNAPTIC SPIKE BURST

Figure 2—Idealized postsynaptic potentials]

In addition to synaptically induced potentials, low-frequency,
spontaneous potential fluctuations have been observed in many neurons
(2), (7), (9), (10), (11). These fluctuations, generally referred to
as pacemaker potentials, are usually rhythmic and may be undulatory
or more nearly saw-toothed in form. The depolarizing phase may be
accompanied by a spike, a volley of spikes, or no spikes at all.
Pacemaker frequencies have been noted from ten or more cycles per
second down to one cycle every ten seconds or more. Some idealized
pacemaker wave forms are shown in Figure 3.

[Illustration: A. PERIODIC BURSTS]

[Illustration: B. PACEMAKER POTENTIALS WITHOUT SPIKES]

[Illustration: C. PACEMAKER POTENTIALS WITH SINGLE SPIKES ON
DEPOLARIZING PHASE

Figure 3—Idealized pacemaker potentials]

[Illustration: A. FORM OF VOLTAGE STIMULI AND RESULTING MEMBRANE
POTENTIAL CHANGES.]

[Illustration: B. RESPONSE CURVE OF TYPICAL GRADED RESPONSE REGION.

Figure 4—Graded response]

Bullock (7), (10), (12), (13) has demonstrated the existence of
a third type of subthreshold response, which he calls the graded
response. While the postsynaptic membrane is quite often electrically
inexcitable, other regions of the somatic and dendritic membranes
appear to be moderately excitable. It is in these regions that Bullock
observes the graded response. If one applies a series of pulsed voltage
stimuli to the graded-response region, the observed responses would be
similar to those shown in Figure 4A. Plotting the peak response voltage
as a function of the stimulus voltage would result in a curve similar
to that in Figure 4B (see Ref. 3, page 4). For small values of input
voltage, the response curve is linear; the membrane is passive. As the
stimulus voltage is increased, however, the response becomes more and
more disproportionate. The membrane is actively amplifying the stimulus
potential. At even higher values of stimulus potential, the system
becomes regenerative; and a full action potential results. The peak
amplitude of the response depends on the duration of the stimulus as
well as on the amplitude. It also depends on the rate of application of
the stimulus voltage. If the stimulus potential is a voltage ramp, for
example, the response will depend on the slope of the ramp. If the rate
of rise is sufficiently low, the membrane will respond in a passive
manner to voltages much greater than the spike threshold for suddenly
applied voltages. In other words, the graded-response regions appear to
accommodate to slowly varying potentials.

In terms of functional operation, we can think of the synapse as a
transducer. The input to this transducer is a spike or series of spikes
in the presynaptic axon. The output is an accumulative, long-lasting
potential which in some way (perhaps not uniquely) represents the
pattern of presynaptic spikes. The pacemaker appears to perform the
function of a clock, producing periodic spikes or spike bursts or
producing periodic changes in the over-all excitability of the neuron.
The graded-response regions appear to act as nonlinear amplifiers and,
occasionally, spike initiators. The net result of this electrical
activity is transformed into a series of spikes which originate at
spike initiation sites and are propagated along axons to other neurons.
The electrical activity in the neuron described above is summarized in
the following outline (taken in part from Bullock (7)):

    1. Synaptic Potentials
         a. Excitatory or inhibitory
         b. Facilitated, antifacilitated, or neither
         c. With excitatory aftereffect, inhibitory aftereffect,
            neither, or both

    2. Pacemaker Potentials
         a. Relaxation type, undulatory type, or none at all
         b. Producing single spike, spike burst, or no spikes
         c. Rhythmic or sporadic

    3. Graded Response (rate sensitive)

    4. Spike Initiation


THE MODERN IONIC HYPOTHESIS

Hodgkin, Huxley, and Katz (3) and Hodgkin and Huxley (14), (15), (16),
in 1952, published a series of papers describing detailed measurements
of voltage, current, and time relationships in the giant axon of the
squid (_Loligo_). Hodgkin and Huxley (17) consolidated and formalized
these data into a set of simultaneous differential equations describing
the hypothetical time course of events during spike generation and
propagation. The hypothetical system which these equations describe is
the basis of the Modern Ionic Hypothesis.

The system proposed by Hodgkin and Huxley is basically one of dynamic
opposition of ionic fluxes across the axon membrane. The membrane
itself forms the boundary between two liquid phases—the intracellular
fluid and the extracellular fluid. The intracellular fluid is rich in
potassium ions and immobile organic anions, while the extracellular
fluid contains an abundance of sodium ions and chloride ions. The
membrane is slightly permeable to the potassium, sodium, and chloride
ions; so these ions tend to diffuse across the membrane. When the
axon is inactive (not propagating a spike), the membrane is much more
permeable to chloride and potassium ions than it is to sodium ions.
In this state, in fact, sodium ions are actively transported from the
inside of the membrane to the outside at a rate just sufficient to
balance the inward leakage. The relative sodium ion concentrations on
both sides of the membrane are thus fixed by the active transport rate,
and the net sodium flux across the membrane is effectively zero. The
potassium ions, on the other hand, tend to move out of the cell; while
chloride ions tend to move into it. The inside of the cell thus becomes
negative with respect to the outside. When the potential across the
membrane is sufficient to balance the inward diffusion of chloride with
an equal outward drift, and the outward diffusion of potassium with an
inward drift (and possibly an inward active exchange), equilibrium is
established. The equilibrium potential is normally in the range of 60
to 65 millivolts.

The resting neural membrane is thus polarized, with the inside
approximately 60 millivolts negative with respect to the outside.
Most of the Hodgkin-Huxley data is based on measurements of the
transmembrane current in response to an imposed stepwise reduction
(depolarization) of membrane potential. By varying the external
ion concentrations, Hodgkin and Huxley were able to resolve the
transmembrane current into two “active” components, the potassium
ion current and the sodium ion current. They found that while the
membrane permeabilities to chloride and most other inorganic ions
were relatively constant, the permeabilities to both potassium and
sodium were strongly dependent on membrane potential. In response to a
suddenly applied (step) depolarization, the sodium permeability rises
rapidly to a peak and then declines exponentially to a steady value.
The potassium permeability, on the other hand, rises with considerable
delay to a value which is maintained as long as the membrane remains
depolarized. The magnitudes of both the potassium and the sodium
permeabilities increase monotonically with increasing depolarization.
A small imposed depolarization will result in an immediately
increased sodium permeability. The resulting increased influx of
sodium ions results in further depolarization; and the process
becomes regenerative, producing the all-or-none action potential.
At the peak of the action potential, the sodium conductance begins
to decline, while the delayed potassium conductance is increasing.
Recovery is brought about by an efflux of potassium ions, and both
ionic permeabilities fall rapidly as the membrane is repolarized.
The potassium permeability, however, falls less rapidly than that of
sodium. This is basically the explanation of the all-or-none spike
according to the Modern Ionic Hypothesis.

[Illustration: Figure 5—Hodgkin-Huxley representation of small area of
axon membrane]

[Illustration: Figure 6—Typical responses of sodium conductance and
potassium conductance to imposed step depolarization]

By defining the net driving force on any given ion species as the
difference between the membrane potential and the equilibrium potential
for that ion and describing permeability changes in terms of equivalent
electrical conductance changes, Hodgkin and Huxley reduced the ionic
model to the electrical equivalent in Figure 5. The important dynamic
variables in this equivalent network are the sodium conductance
(G{Na}) and the potassium conductance (G{K}). The change in the sodium
conductance in response to a step depolarization is shown in Figure 6B.
This change can be characterized by seven voltage dependent parameters:

    1. Delay time—generally much less than 1 msec
    2. Rise time—1 msec or less
    3. Magnitude of peak conductance—increases
       monotonically with increasing depolarization
    4. Inactivation time constant—decreases
       monotonically with increasing depolarization.
    5. Time constant of recovery from
       inactivation—incomplete data
    6. Magnitude of steady-state conductance—increases
       monotonically with increasing depolarization
    7. Fall time on sudden repolarization—less than 1 msec.

Figure 6B shows the potassium conductance change in response to
an imposed step depolarization. Four parameters are sufficient to
characterize this response:

    1. Delay time—decreases monotonically with
       increasing depolarization
    2. Rise time—decreases monotonically with increasing
       depolarization
    3. Magnitude of steady-state conductance—increases
       monotonically with increasing depolarization
    4. Fall time on sudden repolarization—8 msec
       or more, decreases slightly with increasing
       depolarization.

In addition to the aforementioned parameters, the transient portion of
the sodium conductance appears to exhibit an accommodation to slowly
varying membrane potentials. The time constants of accommodation appear
to be those of inactivation or recovery from inactivation—depending on
the direction of change in the membrane potential (18). The remaining
elements in the Hodgkin-Huxley model are constant and are listed below:

    1. Potassium potential—80 to 85 mv (inside negative)
    2. Sodium potential—45 to 50 mv (inside positive)
    3. Leakage potential—38 to 43 mv (inside negative)
    4. Leakage conductance—approx. 0.23 millimhos/cm²
    5. Membrane capacitance—approx. 1 μf/cm²
    6. Resting potential—60 to 65 mv
    7. Spike amplitude—approx. 100 mv


ELECTRONIC SIMULATION OF THE HODGKIN-HUXLEY MODEL

[Illustration: Figure 7—System diagram for electronic simulation of the
Hodgkin-Huxley model]

Given a suitable means of generating the conductance functions,
G_{Na}(v,t) and G_{K}(v,t), one can readily stimulate the essential
aspects of the Modern Ionic Hypothesis. If we wish to do this
electronically, we have two problems. First, we must synthesize
a network whose input is the membrane potential and whose output
is a voltage or current proportional to the desired conductance
function. Second, we must transform the output from a voltage or
current to an effective electronic conductance. The former implies
the need for nonlinear, active filters, while the latter implies
the need for multipliers. The basic block diagram is shown in
Figure 7. Several distinct realizations of this system have been
developed in our laboratory, and in each case the results were the
same. With parameters adjusted to closely match the data of Hodgkin
and Huxley, the electronic model exhibits all of the important
properties of the axon. It produces spikes of 1 to 2 msec duration
with a threshold of approximately 5% to 10% of the spike amplitude.
The applied stimulus is generally followed by a prepotential, then
an active rise of less than 1 msec, followed by an active recovery.
The after-depolarization generally lasts several msec, followed by
a prolonged after-hyperpolarization. The model exhibits the typical
strength-duration curve, with rheobase of 5% to 10% of the spike
amplitude. For sufficiently prolonged sodium inactivation (long time
constant of recovery from inactivation), the model also exhibits an
effect identical to classical Wedensky inhibition (18). Thus, as would
be expected, the electronic model simulates very well the electrical
properties of the axon.

In addition to the axon properties, however, the electronic model is
able to reproduce all of the somatic and dendritic activity outlined
in the section on subthreshold activity. Simulation of the pacemaker
and graded-response potentials is accomplished without additional
circuitry. In the case of synaptically induced potentials, however,
auxiliary networks are required. These networks provide additive terms
to the variable conductances in accordance with current notions on
synaptic transmission (19). Two types of networks have been used. In
both, the inputs are simulated presynaptic spikes, and in both the
outputs are the resulting simulated chemical transmitter concentration.
In both, the transmitter substance was assumed to be injected at a
constant rate during a presynaptic spike and subsequently inactivated
in the presence of an enzyme. One network simulates a first-order
chemical reaction, where the enzyme concentration is effectively
constant. The other simulates a second-order chemical reaction,
where the enzyme concentration is assumed to be reduced during the
inactivation process. For simulation of an excitatory synapse, the
output of the auxiliary network is added directly to G_{Na} in the
electronic model. For inhibition, it is added to G_{K}. With the
parameters of the electronic membrane model set at the values measured
by Hodgkin and Huxley, we have attempted to simulate synaptic activity
with the aid of the two types of auxiliary networks. In the case of
the simulated first-order reaction, the excitatory synapse exhibits
facilitation, antifacilitation, or neither—depending on the setting
of a single parameter, the transmitter inactivation rate (_i.e._,
the effective enzyme concentration). This parameter would appear,
in passing, to be one of the most probable synaptic variables. In
this case, the mechanisms for facilitation and antifacilitation are
contained in the simulated postsynaptic membrane. Facilitation is due
to the nonlinear dependence of G_{Na} on membrane potential, while
antifacilitation is due to inactivation of G_{Na}. The occurrence
of one form of response or the other is determined by the relative
importance of the two mechanisms (18). Grundfest (20) has mentioned
both of these mechanisms as potentially facilitory and antifacilitory,
respectively. The simulated inhibitory synapse with the first order
input is capable of facilitation (18), but no antifacilitation has been
observed. Again, the presence or absence of facilitation is determined
by the inactivation rate.

With the simulated second-order reaction, both excitatory and
inhibitory synapses exhibit facilitation. In this case, two facilitory
mechanisms are present—one in the postsynaptic membrane and one in the
nonconstant transmitter inactivation reaction. The active membrane
currents can, in fact, be removed; and this system will still exhibit
facilitation. With the second-order auxiliary network, the presence
of excitatory facilitation, antifacilitation, or neither depends
on the initial, or resting, transmitter inactivation rate. The
synaptic behavior also depends parametrically on the simulated enzyme
reactivation rate. Inhibitory antifacilitation can be introduced with
either type of auxiliary network by limiting the simulated presynaptic
transmitter supply.

Certain classes of aftereffects are inherent in the mechanisms of the
Ionic Hypothesis. In the electronic model, aftereffects are observed
following presynaptic volleys with either type of auxiliary network.
Following a volley of spikes into the simulated excitatory synapse,
for example, rebound hyperpolarization may or may not occur depending
on the simulated transmitter inactivation rate. If the inactivation
rate is sufficiently high, rebound will occur. This rebound can be
monophasic (inhibitory phase only) or polyphasic (successive cycles
of excitation and inhibition). Following a volley of spikes into the
simulated inhibitory synapse, rebound depolarization may or may not
occur depending on the simulated transmitter inactivation rate. This
rebound can also be monophasic or polyphasic. Sustained postexcitatory
depolarization and sustained postinhibitory hyperpolarization (2) have
been achieved in the model by making the transmitter inactivation rate
sufficiently low.

The general forms of the postsynaptic potentials simulated with
the electronic model are strikingly similar to those published in
the literature for real neurons. The first-order auxiliary network
produces facilitation of a form almost identical to that shown by Otani
and Bullock (8) while the second-order auxiliary network produces
facilitation of the type shown by Chalazonitis and Arvanitake (2).
The excitatory antifacilitation is almost identical to that shown by
Hagiwara and Bullock (1) in both form and dependence on presynaptic
spike frequency. In every case, the synaptic behavior is determined
by the effective rate of transmitter inactivation, which in real
neurons would presumably be directly proportional to the effective
concentration of inactivating enzyme at the synapse.

Pacemaker potentials are easily simulated with the electronic model
without the use of auxiliary networks. This is achieved either by
inserting a large, variable shunt resistor across the simulated
membrane (see Figure 5) or by allowing a small sodium current leakage
at the resting potential. With the remaining parameters of the
model set as close as possible to the values determined by Hodgkin
and Huxley, the leakage current induces low-frequency, spontaneous
spiking. The spike frequency increases monotonically with increasing
leakage current. In addition, if the sodium conductance inactivation
is allowed to accumulate over several spikes, periodic spike pairs
and spike bursts will result. Subthreshold pacemaker potentials have
also been observed in the model, but with parameter values set close
to the Hodgkin-Huxley data these are generally higher in frequency
than pacemaker potentials in real neurons. It is interesting that
a pacemaker mode may exist in the absence of the simulated sodium
conductance. It is a very high-frequency mode (50 cps or more)
and results from the alternating dominance of potassium current
and chloride (or leakage ion) current in determining the membrane
potential. The significance of this mode cannot be assessed until
better data is available for the potassium conductance at low levels
of depolarization in real neurons. In general, as far as the model is
concerned, pacemaker potentials are possible because the potassium
conductance is delayed in both its rise with depolarization and its
fall with repolarization.

Rate sensitive graded response has also been observed in the electronic
model. The rate sensitivity—or accommodation—is due to the sodium
conductance inactivation. The response of the model to an imposed ramp
depolarization was discussed in Reference 18. At this time, several
alternative model parameters could be altered to bring about reduced
electrical excitability. None of the parameter changes was very
satisfying, however, because none of them was in any way justified by
physiological data. We have since found that the membrane capacitance,
a plausible parameter in view of recent physiological findings, can
completely determine the electrical excitability. Thus, with the
capacitance determined by Hodgkin and Huxley (1 microfarad per cm²),
the model exhibits excitability characteristic of the axon. As the
capacitance is increased, the model becomes less excitable until, with
10 or 12 μμf, it is effectively inexcitable. Thus, with an increased
capacitance—but with all the remaining parameters set as close as
possible to the Hodgkin-Huxley values—the electronic model exhibits the
characteristics of Bullock’s graded-response regions.

Whether membrane capacitance is the determining factor in real neurons
is, of course, a matter of speculation. Quite a controversy is raging
over membrane capacity measurements (see Rall (21)), but the evidence
indicates that the capacity in the soma is considerably greater than
that in the axon (6), (22).

It should be added that increasing the capacitance until the membrane
model becomes inexcitable has little effect on the variety of available
simulated synaptic responses. Facilitation, antifacilitation, and
rebound are still present and still depend on the transmitter
inactivation rate. Thus, in the model, we can have a truly inexcitable
membrane which nevertheless utilizes the active membrane conductances
to provide facilitation or antifacilitation, and rebound. The simulated
subthreshold pacemaker potentials are much more realistic with the
increased capacitance, being lower in frequency and more natural in
form.

In one case, the electronic model predicted behavior which was
subsequently reported in real neurons. This was in respect to the
interaction of synaptic potentials and pacemaker potential. It was
noted in early experiments that when the model was set in a pacemaker
mode, and periodic spikes were applied to the simulated inhibitory
synapse, the pacemaker frequency could be modified; and, in fact,
it would tend to lock on to the stimulus frequency. This produced
a paradoxical effect whereby the frequency of spontaneous spikes
was actually increased by increasing the frequency of inhibitory
synaptic stimuli. At very low stimulus frequencies, the spontaneous
pacemaker frequency was not appreciably perturbed. As the stimulus
frequency was increased, and approached the basic pacemaker frequency,
the latter tended to lock on and follow further increases in the
stimulus frequency. When the stimulus frequency became too high for
the pacemaker to follow, the latter decreased abruptly in frequency
and locked on to the first subharmonic. As the stimulus frequency was
further increased, the pacemaker frequency would increase, then skip to
the next harmonic, then increase again, _etc._ This type of behavior
was observed by Moore _et al._ (23) in _Aplysia_ and reported at the
San Diego Symposium for Biomedical Electronics shortly after it was
observed by the author in the electronic model.

Thus, we have shown that an electronic analog with all parameters
except membrane capacitance fixed at values close to those of Hodgkin
and Huxley, can provide all of the normal threshold or axonal
behavior and also all of the subthreshold somatic and dendritic
behavior outlined on page 7. Whether or not this is of physiological
significance, it certainly provides a unifying basis for construction
of electronic neural analogs. Simple circuits, based on the
Hodgkin-Huxley model and providing all of the aforementioned behavior,
have been constructed with ten or fewer inexpensive transistors with
a normal complement of associated circuitry (18). In the near future
we hope to utilize several models of this type to help assess the
information-processing capabilities not only of individual neurons but
also of small groups or networks of neurons.


REFERENCES

    1. Hagiwara, S., and Bullock, T. H.
       “Intracellular Potentials in Pacemaker and Integrative Neurons of
        the Lobster Cardiac Ganglion,”
       _J. Cell and Comp. Physiol._ =50 (No. 1)=:25-48 (1957)

    2. Chalazonitis, N., and Arvanitaki, A.,
       “Slow Changes during and following Repetitive Synaptic Activation
        in Ganglion Nerve Cells,”
       _Bull. Inst. Oceanogr. Monaco_ =No. 1225=:1-23 (1961)

    3. Hodgkin, A. L., Huxley, A. F., and Katz, B.,
       “Measurement of Current-Voltage Relations in the Membrane of the
        Giant Axon of _Loligo_,”
       _J. Physiol._ =116=:424-448 (1952)

    4. Hagiwara, S., and Saito, N.,
       “Voltage-Current Relations in Nerve Cell Membrane of Onchidium
       _verruculatum_,”
       _J. Physiol._ =148=:161-179 (1959)

    5. Hagiwara, S., and Saito, N.,
       “Membrane Potential Change and Membrane Current in Supramedullary
        Nerve Cell of Puffer,”
       _J. Neurophysiol._ =22=:204-221 (1959)

    6. Hagiwara, S.,
       “Current-Voltage Relations of Nerve Cell Membrane,”
       “Electrical Activity of Single Cells,”
        Igakushoin, Hongo, Tokyo (1960)

    7. Bullock, T. H.,
       “Parameters of Integrative Action of the Nervous System at the
        Neuronal Level,”
       _Experimental Cell Research Suppl._ =5=:323-337 (1958)

    8. Otani, T., and Bullock, T. H.,
       “Effects of Presetting the Membrane Potential of the Soma of
        Spontaneous and Integrating Ganglion Cells,”
       _Physiological Zoology_ =32 (No. 2)=:104-114 (1959)

    9. Bullock, T. H., and Terzuolo, C. A.,
       “Diverse Forms of Activity in the Somata of Spontaneous and
        Integrating Ganglion Cells,”
       _J. Physiol._ =138=:343-364 (1957)

    10. Bullock, T. H.,
        “Neuron Doctrine and Electrophysiology,”
        _Science_ =129 (No. 3355)=:997-1002 (1959)

    11. Chalazonitis, N., and Arvanitaki, A.,
        “Slow Waves and Associated Spiking in Nerve Cells of
        _Aplysia_,”
        _Bull. Inst. Oceanogr. Monaco_ =No. 1224=:1-15 (1961)

    12. Bullock, T. H.,
        “Properties of a Single Synapse in the Stellate Ganglion of
         Squid,”
        _J. Neurophysiol._ =11=:343-364 (1948)

    13. Bullock, T. H.,
        “Neuronal Integrative Mechanisms,”
        “Recent Advances in Invertebrate Physiology,”
         Scheer, B. T., ed., Eugene, Oregon:Univ. Oregon Press 1957

    14. Hodgkin, A. L., and Huxley, A. F.,
        “Currents Carried by Sodium and Potassium Ions through the
         Membrane of the Giant Axon of Loligo,”
        _J. Physiol._ =116=:449-472 (1952)

    15. Hodgkin, A. L., and Huxley, A. F.,
        “The Components of Membrane Conductance in the Giant Axon of
        _Loligo_,”
        _J. Physiol._ =116=:473-496 (1952)

    16. Hodgkin, A. L., and Huxley, A. F.,
        “The Dual Effect of Membrane Potential on Sodium Conductance in
         the Giant Axon of _Loligo_,”
        _J. Physiol._ =116=:497-506 (1952)

    17. Hodgkin, A. L., and Huxley, A. F.,
        “A Quantitative Description of Membrane Current and its
         Application to Conduction and Excitation in Nerve,”
        _J. Physiol._ =117=:500-544 (1952)

    18. Lewis, E. R.,
        “An Electronic Analog of the Neuron Based on the Dynamics of
         Potassium and Sodium Ion Fluxes,”
        “Neural Theory and Modeling,”
         R. F. Reiss, ed., Palo Alto, California:Stanford University
         Press, 1964

    19. Eccles, J. C.,
       _Physiology of Synapses_,
        Berlin:Springer-Verlag, 1963

    20. Grundfest, H.,
        “Excitation Triggers in Post-Junctional Cells,”
        “Physiological Triggers,”
         T. H. Bullock, ed., Washington, D.C.:American Physiological
         Society, 1955

    21. Rall, W.,
        “Membrane Potential Transients and Membrane Time Constants of
         Motoneurons,”
        _Exp. Neurol._ =2=:503-532 (1960)

    22. Araki, T., and Otani, T.,
        “The Response of Single Motoneurones to Direct Stimulation,”
        _J. Neurophysiol._ =18=:472-485 (1955)

    23. Moore, G. P., Perkel, D. H., and Segundo, J. P.,
        “Stability Patterns in Interneuronal Pacemaker Regulation,”
        _Proceedings of the San Diego Symposium for Biomedical
         Engineering_, San Diego, California, 1963

    24. Eccles, J. C.,
       _The Neurophysiological Basis of Mind_,
        Oxford:Clarendon Press, 1952




Fields and Waves in Excitable Cellular Structures


                       R. M. STEWART

                _Space General Corporation
                   El Monte, California_

    “Study of living processes by the physiological
    method only proceeded laboriously behind the study of
    non-living systems. Knowledge about respiration, for
    instance, began to become well organized as the study
    of combustion proceeded, since this is an analogous
    operation....”

                                        J. Z. Young (24)


INTRODUCTION

The study of electrical fields in densely-packed cellular media is
prompted primarily by a desire to understand more fully the details
of brain mechanism and its relation to behavior. Our work has
specifically been directed toward an attempt to model such structures
and mechanisms, using relatively simple inorganic materials.

The prototype for such experiments is the “Lillie[1] iron-wire nerve
model.” Over a hundred years ago, it had been observed that visible
waves were produced on the surface of a piece of iron submerged in
nitric acid when and where the iron is touched by a piece of zinc.
After a short period of apparent fatigue, the wire recovers and can
again support a wave when stimulated. Major support for the idea that
such impulses are in fact directly related to peripheral nerve impulses
came from Lillie around 1920. Along an entirely different line,
various persons have noted the morphological and dynamic similarity of
dendrites in brain and those which sometimes grow by electrodeposition
of metals from solution. Gordon Pask (17), especially, has pointed to
this similarity and has discussed in a general way the concomitant
possibility of a physical model for the persistent memory trace.

[1] For review articles see: Lillie (13), Franck (6).

By combining and extending such concepts and techniques, we hope to
produce a macroscopic model of “gray matter,” the structural matrix of
which will consist of a dense, homogeneously-mixed, conglomerate of
small pellets, capable of supporting internal waves of excitation, of
changing electrical behavior through internal fine-structure growth,
and of forming temporal associations in response to peripheral shocks.

A few experimenters have subsequently pursued the iron-wire
nerve-impulse analogy further, hoping thereby to illuminate the
mechanisms of nerve excitation, impulse transmission and recovery,
but interest has generally been quite low. It has remained fairly
undisturbed in the text books and lecture demonstrations of medical
students, as a picturesque aid to their formal education. On the
outer fringes of biology, still less interest has been displayed;
the philosophical vitalists would surely be revolted by the idea of
such models of mind and memory, and at the other end of the scale,
contemporary computer engineers generally assume that a nerve cell
operates much too slowly to be of any value. This lack of interest
is certainly due, in part, to success in developing techniques of
monitoring individual nerve fibers directly to the point that it is
just about as easy to work with large nerve fibers (and even peripheral
and spinal junctions) as it is to work with iron wires. Under such
circumstances, the model has only limited value, perhaps just to the
extent that it emphasizes the role of factors other than specific
molecular structure and local chemical reactions in the dynamics of
nerve action.

When we leave the questions of impulse transmission on long fibers
and peripheral junctions, however, and attempt to discuss the brain,
there can be hardly any doubt that the development of a meaningful
physical model technique would be of great value. Brain tissue is
soft and sensitive, the cellular structures are small, tangled, and
incredibly numerous. Therefore (Young (24)), “ ... physiologists hope
that after having learned a lot about nerve-impulses in the nerves they
will be able to go on to study how these impulses interact when they
reach the brain. [But], we must not assume that we shall understand
the brain only in the terms we have learned to use for the nerves.
The function of nerves is to carry impulses—like telegraph wires. The
functions of brains is something else.” But, confronted with such
awesome experimental difficulties, with no comprehensive mathematical
theory in sight, we are largely limited otherwise to verbal discourses,
rationales and theorizing, a hopelessly clumsy tool for the development
of an adequate understanding of brain function. A little over ten years
ago Sperry (19) said, “Present day science is quite at a loss even
to begin to describe the neural events involved in the simplest form
of mental activity.” This situation has not changed much today. The
development, study, and understanding of complex high-density cellular
structures which incorporate characteristics of both the Lillie and
Pask models may, it is hoped, alleviate this situation. There would
also be fairly obvious technological applications for such techniques
if highly developed and which, more than any other consideration, has
prompted support for this work.

Experiments to date have been devised which demonstrate the following
basic physical functional characteristics:

    (1) Control of bulk resistivity of electrolytes containing
        closely-packed, poorly-conducting pellets
    (2) Circulation of regenerative waves on closed loops
    (3) Strong coupling between isolated excitable sites
    (4) Logically-complete wave interactions, including facilitation
        and annihilation
    (5) Dendrite growth by electrodeposition in “closed” excitable
        systems
    (6) Subthreshold distributed field effects, especially in
        locally-refractory regions.

In addition, our attention has necessarily been directed to various
problems of general experimental technique and choice of materials,
especially as related to stability, fast recovery and long life.
However, in order to understand the possible significance of, and
motivation for such experiments, some related modern concepts of
neurophysiology, histology and psychology will be reviewed very
briefly. These concepts are, respectively:

    (1) Cellular structure in the central nervous system
    (2) Short-term or “ephemeral” memory
    (3) The synapse
    (4) Inhibition
    (5) Long-term memory traces or engram
    (6) Spatially-diffuse temporal association and learning.


SOME CONTEMPORARY CONCEPTS

Since we are attempting to duplicate processes other than chemical,
per se, we will forego any reference to the extensive literature of
neurochemistry. It should not be surprising though if, at the neglect
of the fundamental biological processes of growth, reproduction and
metabolism, it proves possible to imitate some learning mechanisms
with grossly less complex molecular structures. There is also
much talk of chemical versus electrical theories and mechanisms in
neurophysiology. The distinction, when it can be made, seems to hinge
on the question of the scale of size of significant interactions. Thus,
“chemical” interactions presumably take place at molecular distances,
possibly as a result of or subsequent to a certain amount of thermal
diffusion. “Electrical” interactions, on the other hand, are generally
understood to imply longer range or larger scale macroscopic fields.


1. Cellular Structure

The human brain contains approximately 10¹⁰ neurons to which the
neuron theory assigns the primary role in central nervous activity.
These cells occupy, however, a relatively small fraction of the total
volume. There are, for example, approximately 10 times that number of
neuroglia, cells of relatively indeterminate function. Each neuron
(consisting of cell body, dendrites and, sometimes, an axon) comes into
close contact with the dendrites of other neurones at some thousands
of places, these synapses and “ephapses” being spaced approximately 5μ
apart (1). The total number of such apparent junctions is therefore
of the order of 10¹³. In spite of infinite fine-structure variations
when viewed with slightly blurred vision, the cellular structure of
the brain is remarkably homogeneous. In the cortex, at least, the
extensions of most cells are relatively short, and when the cortex is
at rest, it appears from the large EEG alpha-rhythms that large numbers
of cells beat together in unison. Quoting again from Sperry, “In short,
current brain theory encourages us to try to correlate our subjective
psychic experience with the activity of relatively homogeneous nerve
cell units conducting essentially homogeneous impulses, through roughly
homogeneous cerebral tissue.”


2. Short-Term Memory

A train of impulses simply travelling on a long fiber may, for
example, be regarded as a short-term memory much in the same way as
a delay line acts as a transient memory in a computer. A similar
but slightly longer term memory may also be thought of to exist in
the form of waves circulating in closed loops (23). In fact, it is
almost universally held today that most significant memory occurs
in two basic interrelated ways. First of all, such a short-term
circulating, reverberatory or regenerative memory which, however, could
not conceivably persist through such things as coma, anesthesia,
concussion, extreme cold, deep sleep and convulsive seizures and
thus, secondly, a long-term memory trace which must somehow reside
in a semipermanent fine-structural change. As Hebb (9) stated, “A
reverbratory trace might cooperate with a structural change and carry
the memory until the growth change is made.”


3. The Synapse

The current most highly regarded specific conception of the synapse
is largely due to and has been best described by Eccles (5): “ ...
the synaptic connections between nerve cells are the only functional
connections of any significance. These synapses are of two types,
excitatory and inhibitory, the former type tending to make nerve cells
discharge impulses, the other to suppress the discharge. There is now
convincing evidence that in vertebrate synapses each type operates
through specific chemical transmitter substances ...”. In response to
a presentation by Hebb (10), Eccles was quoted as saying, “One final
point, and that is if there is electrical interaction, and we have seen
from Dr. Estable’s work the complexity of connections, and we now know
from the electronmicroscopists that there is no free space, only 200
Å clefts, everywhere in the central nervous system, then everything
should be electrically interacted with everything else. I think this is
only electrical background noise and, that when we lift with specific
chemical connections above that noise we get a significant operational
system. I would say that there is electrical interaction but it is just
a noise, a nuisance.” Eccles’ conclusions are primarily based on data
obtained in the peripheral nervous system and the spinal cord. But
there is overwhelming reason to expect that cellular interactions in
the brain are an entirely different affair. For example, “The highest
centres in the octopus, as in vertebrates and arthropods, contain many
small neurons. This finding is such a commonplace, that we have perhaps
failed in the past to make the fullest inquiry into its implications.
Many of these small cells possess numerous processes, but no axon. It
is difficult to see, therefore, that their function can be conductive
in the ordinary sense. Most of our ideas about nervous functioning are
based on the assumption that each neuron acts essentially as a link in
some chain of conduction, but there is really no warrant for this in
the case of cells with many short branches. Until we know more of the
relations of these processes to each other in the neuropile it would
be unwise to say more. It is possible that the effective part of the
discharge of such cells is not as it is in conduction in long pathways,
the internal circuit that returns through the same fiber, but the
external circuit that enters other processes, ...” (3).


4. Inhibition

The inhibitory chemical transmitter substance postulated by Eccles
has never been detected in spite of numerous efforts to do so. The
mechanism(s) of inhibition is perhaps the key to the question of
cellular interaction and, in one form or another, must be accounted for
in any adequate theory.

Other rather specific forms of excitation and inhibition interaction
have been proposed at one time or another. Perhaps the best example is
the polar neuron of Gesell (8) and, more recently, Retzlaff (18). In
such a concept, excitatory and inhibitory couplings differ basically
because of a macroscopic structural difference at the cellular level;
that is, various arrangements or orientation of intimate cellular
structures give rise to either excitation or inhibition.


5. Long-Term Memory

Most modern theories of semipermanent structural change (or _engrams_,
as they are sometimes called) look either to the molecular level or to
the cellular level. Various specific locales for the engram have been
suggested, including (1) modifications of RNA molecular structure,
(2) changes of cell size, synapse area or dendrite extensions, (3)
neuropile modification, and (4) local changes in the cell membrane.
There is, in fact, rather direct evidence of the growth of neurons or
their dendrites with use and the diminution or atrophy of dendrites
with disuse. The apical dendrite of pyramidal neurones becomes thicker
and more twisted with continuing activity, nerve fibers swell when
active, sprout additional branches (at least in the spinal cord) and
presumably increase the size and number of their terminal knobs.
As pointed out by Konorski (11), the morphological conception of
plasticity according to which plastic changes would be related to the
formation and multiplication of new synaptic junctions goes back at
least as far as Ramon y Cajal in 1904. Whatever the substrate of the
memory trace, it is, at least in adults, remarkably immune to extensive
brain damage and as Young (24) has said: “ ... this question of the
nature of the memory trace is one of the most obscure and disputed in
the whole of biology.”


6. Field Effects and Learning

First, from Boycott and Young (3), “The current conception, on which
most discussions of learning still concentrate, is that the nervous
system consists essentially of an aggregate of chains of conductors,
linked at key points by synapses. This reflex conception, springing
probably from Cartesian theory and method, has no doubt proved of
outstanding value in helping us to analyse the actions of the spinal
cord, but it can be argued that it has actually obstructed the
development of understanding of cerebral function.”

Most observable evidence of learning and memory is extremely complex
and its interpretation full of traps. Learning in its broadest sense
might be detected as a semipermanent change of behavior pattern brought
about as a result of experience. Within that kind of definition, we
can surely identify several distinctly different types of learning,
presumably with distinctly different kinds of mechanisms associated
with each one. But, if we are to stick by our definition of a condition
of semipermanent change of behavior as a criterion for learning, then
we may also be misled into considering the development of a neurosis,
for example, as learning, or even a deep coma as learning.

When we come to consider field effects, current theories tend to get
fairly obscure, but there seems to be an almost universal recognition
of the fact that such fields are significant. For example, Morrell
(16) says in his review of electrophysiological contributions to the
neural basis of learning, “A growing body of knowledge (see reviews
by Purpura, Grundfest, and Bishop) suggests that the most significant
integrative work of the central nervous system is carried on in graded
response elements—elements in which the degree of reaction depends upon
stimulus intensity and is not all-or-none, which have no refractory
period and in which continuously varying potential changes of either
sign occur and mix and algebraically sum.” Gerard (7) also makes a
number of general comments along these lines. “These attributes of
a given cell are, in turn, normally controlled by impulses arising
from other regions, by fields surrounding them—both electric and
chemical—electric and chemical fields can strongly influence the
interaction of neurones. This has been amply expounded in the case of
the electric fields.”

Learning situations involving “punishment” and “reward” or,
subjectively, “pain” and “pleasure” may very likely be associated
with transient but structurally widespread field effects. States of
distress and of success seem to exert a lasting influence on behavior
only in relation to _simultaneous_ sensory events or, better yet,
sensory events just immediately _preceding_ in time. For example, the
“anticipatory” nature of a conditioned reflex has been widely noted
(21). From a structural point of view, it is as if recently active
sites regardless of location or function were especially sensitive to
extensive fields. There is a known inherent electrical property of both
nerve membrane and passive iron surface that could hold the answer to
this mechanism of spatially-diffuse temporal association; namely, the
surface resistance drops to less than 1 per cent of its resting value
during the refractory period which immediately follows activation.


EXPERIMENTAL TECHNIQUE

In almost all experiments, the basic signal-energy mechanism employed
has been essentially that one studied most extensively by Lillie (12),
Bonhoeffer (2), Yamagiwa (22), Matumoto and Goto (14) and others,
_i.e._, activation, impulse propagation and recovery on the normally
passive surface of a piece of iron immersed in nitric acid or of
cobalt in chromic acid (20). The iron we have used most frequently
is of about 99.99% purity, which gives performance more consistent
than but similar to that obtained using cleaned “coat-hanger” wires.
The acid used most frequently by us is about 53-55% aqueous solution
by weight, substantially more dilute than that predominantly used by
previous investigators. The most frequently reported concentration has
been 68-70%, a solution which is quite stable and, hence, much easier
to work with in open containers than the weaker solutions, results in
very fast waves but gives, at room temperatures, a very long refractory
period (typically, 15 minutes). A noble metal (such as silver, gold
or platinum) placed in contact with the surface of the iron has a
stabilizing effect (14) presumably through the action of local currents
and provides a simple and useful technique whereby, with dilution,
both stability and fast recovery (1 second) can be achieved in simple
demonstrations and experiments.

Experiments involving the growth by electrodeposition and study of
metallic dendrites are done with an eye toward electrical, physical
and chemical compatibility with the energy-producing system outlined
above. Best results to date (from the standpoints of stability,
non-reactivity, and morphological similarity to neurological
structures) have been obtained by dissolving various amounts of gold
chloride salt in 53-55% HNO₃.

An apparatus has been devised and assembled for the purpose of
containing and controlling our primary experiments. (See Figure 1).
Its two major components are a test chamber (on the left in Figure
1) and a fluid exchanger (on the right). In normal operation the
test chamber, which is very rigid and well sealed after placing the
experimental assembly inside, is completely filled with electrolyte
(or, initially, an inert fluid) to the exclusion of all air pockets and
bubbles. Thus encapsulated, it is possible to perform experiments which
would otherwise be impossible due to instability. The instability which
plagues such experiments is manifested in copious generation of bubbles
on and subsequent rapid disintegration of all “excitable” material
(_i.e._, iron). Preliminary experiments indicated that such “bubble
instability” could be suppressed by constraining the volume available
to expansion. In particular, response and recovery times can now be
decreased substantially and work can proceed with complex systems of
interest such as aggregates containing many small iron pellets.

The test chamber is provided with a heater (and thermostatic control)
which makes possible electrochemical impulse response and recovery
times comparable to those of the nervous system (1 to 10 msec). The
fluid-exchanger is so arranged that fluid in the test chamber can be
arbitrarily changed or renewed by exchange within a rigid, sealed,
completely liquid-filled (“isochoric”) loop. Thus, stability can
be maintained for long periods of time and over a wide variety of
investigative or operating conditions.

Most of the parts of this apparatus are made of stainless steel and
are sealed with polyethylene and teflon. There is a small quartz
observation window on the test chamber, two small lighting ports, a
pressure transducer, thermocouple, screw-and-piston pressure actuator
and umbilical connector for experimental electrical inputs and outputs.


BASIC EXPERIMENTS

The basic types of experiments described in the following sections
are numbered for comparison to correspond roughly to related
neurophysiological concepts summarized in the previous section.


1. Cellular Structure

The primary object of our research is the control and determination of
dynamic behavior in response to electrical stimulation in close-packed
aggregates of small pellets submerged in electrolyte. Typically, the
aggregate contains (among other things) iron and the electrolyte
contains nitric acid, this combination making possible the propagation
of electrochemical surface waves of excitation through the body of
the aggregate similar to those of the Lillie iron-wire nerve model.
The iron pellets are imbedded in and supported by a matrix of small
dielectric (such as glass) pellets. Furthermore, with the addition
of soluble salts of various noble metals to the electrolyte, long
interstitial dendritic or fibrous structures of the second metal can
be formed whose length and distribution change by electrodeposition in
response to either internal or externally generated fields.

[Illustration: Figure 1—Test chamber and fluid exchanger]

Coupling between isolated excitable (iron) sites is greatly affected
by the fine structure and effective bulk resistivity of the glass and
fluid medium which supports and fills the space between such sites.
In general (see Section 3, following) it is necessary, to promote
strong coupling between small structures, to impede the “short-circuit”
return flow of current from an active or excited surface, through
the electrolyte and back through the dendritic structure attached
to the same excitable site. This calls for control (increase) of
the bulk resistivity, preferably by means specifically independent
of electrolyte composition, which relates to and affects surface
phenomena such as recovery (_i.e._, the “refractory” period). Figure 2
illustrates the way in which this is being done, _i.e._, by appropriate
choice of particle size distributions. The case illustrated shows
the approximate proper volume ratios for maximum resistivity in a
two-size-phase random mixture of spheres.


2. Regenerative Loops

Figure 3 shows an iron loop (about 2-inch diameter) wrapped with a
silver wire helix which is quite stable in 53-55% acid and which
will easily support a circulating pattern of three impulses. For
demonstration, unilateral waves can be generated by first touching the
iron with a piece of zinc (which produces two oppositely travelling
waves) and then blocking one of them with a piece of platinum or a
small platinum screen attached to the end of a stick or wand. Carbon
blocks may also be used for this purpose.

The smallest regenerative or reverberatory loop which we are at present
able to devise is about 1 mm in diameter. Multiple waves, as expected,
produce stable patterns in which all impulses are equally spaced. This
phenomenon can be related to the slightly slower speed characteristic
of the relative refractory period as compared with a more fully
recovered zone.

[Illustration]

[Illustration: Figure 2—Conductivity control—mixed pellet-size
aggregates]

[Illustration: Figure 3—Regenerative or reverberatory loop]


3. Strong Coupling

If two touching pieces of iron are placed in a bath of nitric acid, a
wave generated on one will ordinarily spread to the other. As is to be
expected, a similar result is obtained if the two pieces are connected
through an external conducting wire. However, if they are isolated,
strong coupling does not ordinarily occur, especially if the elements
are small in comparison with a “critical size,” σ/ρ where σ is the
surface resistivity of passive iron surface (in Ω-cm²) and ρ is the
volume resistivity of the acid (in Ω-cm). A simple and informative
structure which demonstrates the essential conditions for strong
electrical coupling between isolated elements of very small size may
be constructed as shown in Figure 4. The dielectric barrier insures
that charge transfer through one dipole must be accompanied by an equal
and opposite transfer through the surfaces of the other dipole. If the
“inexcitable” silver tails have sufficiently high conductance (_i.e._,
sufficiently large surface area, hence preferably, dendrites), strong
coupling will occur, just as though the cores of the two pieces of iron
were connected with a solid conducting wire.

[Illustration: Figure 4]

[Illustration: Figure 5—Electrochemical excitatory-inhibitory
interaction cell]


4. Inhibitory Coupling

If a third “dipole” is inserted through the dielectric membrane in
the opposite direction, then excitation of this isolated element
tends to inhibit the response which would otherwise be elicited by
excitation of one of the parallel dipoles. Figure 5 shows the first
such “logically-complete” interaction cell successfully constructed and
demonstrated. It may be said to behave as an elementary McCulloch-Pitts
neuron (15). Further analysis shows that similar structures
incorporating many dipoles (both excitatory and inhibitory) can be made
to behave as general “linear decision functions” in which all input
weights are approximately proportional to the total size or length of
their corresponding attached dendritic structures.


5. Dendrite Growth

Figure 6 shows a sample gold dendrite grown by electrodeposition
(actual size, about 1 mm) from a 54% nitric acid solution to which gold
chloride was added. When such a dendrite is attached to a piece of
iron (both submerged), activation of the excitable element produces a
field in such a direction as to promote further growth of the dendritic
structure. Thus, if gold chloride is added to the solution used in
the elementary interaction cells described above, all input influence
“weights” tend to increase with use and, hence, produce a plasticity of
function.


6. Field Effects in Locally-Refractory Regions

Our measurements indicate that, during the refractory period following
excitation, the surface resistance of iron in nitric acid drops to
substantially less than 1% of its resting value in a manner reminiscent
of nerve membranes (4). Thus, if a distributed or gross field exists
at any time throughout a complex cellular aggregate, concomitant
current densities in locally-refractive regions will be substantially
higher than elsewhere and, if conditions appropriate to dendrite
growth exist (as described above) growth rates in such regions will
also be substantially higher than elsewhere. It would appear that, as
a result, recently active functional couplings (in contrast to those
not associated with recent neural activity) should be significantly
altered by widely distributed fields or massive peripheral shocks. This
mechanism might thus explain the apparent ability of the brain to form
specific temporal associations in response to spatially-diffuse effects
such as are generated, for example, by the pain receptors.

[Illustration: (a)]

[Illustration: (b)

Figure 6—Dendritic structures, living and non-living. (a) Cat dendrite
trees (from Bok, “Histonomy of the Cerebral Cortex,” Elsevier, 1959);
(b) Electrodeposited gold dendrite tree.]


SUMMARY

An attempt is being made to develop meaningful electrochemical model
techniques which may contribute toward a clearer understanding of
cortical function. Two basic phenomena are simultaneously employed
which are variants of (1) the Lillie iron-wire nerve model, and (2)
growth of metallic dendrites by electrodeposition. These phenomena are
being induced particularly within dense cellular aggregates of various
materials whose interstitial spaces are flooded with liquid electrolyte.


REFERENCES

    1. Bok, S. T.,
       “Histonomy of the Cerebral Cortex,”
        Amsterdam, London:Elsevier Publishing Co., New York:Princeton,
        1959

    2. Bonhoeffer, K. F.,
       “Activation of Passive Iron as a Model for the Excitation of
        Nerve,”
       _J. Gen. Physiol._ =32=:69-91 (1948).
           This paper summarizes work carried out during 1941-1946
           at the University of Leipzig, and published during the
           war years in German periodicals.

    3. Boycott, B. B., and Young, J. Z.,
       “The Comparative Study of Learning,”
        S. E. B. Symposia, No. IV
       “Physiological Mechanisms in Animal Behavior,”
        Cambridge: University Press, USA:Academic Press, Inc., 1950

    4. Cole, K. S., and Curtis, H. J.,
       “Electric Impedance of the Squid Giant Axon During Activity,”
       _J. Gen. Physiol._ =22=:649-670 (1939)

    5. Eccles, J. C.,
       “The Effects of Use and Disuse of Synaptic Function,”
       “Brain Mechanisms and Learning—A Symposium,”
        organized by the Council for International Organizations of
        Medical Science, Oxford:Blackwell Scientific Publications, 1961

    6. Franck, U. F.,
       “Models for Biological Excitation Processes,”
       “Progress in Biophysics and Biophysical Chemistry,”
        J. A. V. Butler, ed., London and New York:Pergamon Press,
        pp. 171-206, 1956

    7. Gerard, R. W.,
       “Biological Roots of Psychiatry,”
       _Science_ =122 (No. 3162)=:225-230 (1955)

    8. Gesell, R.,
       “A Neurophysiological Interpretation of the Respiratory Act,”
       _Ergedn. Physiol._ =43:=477-639 (1940)

    9. Hebb, D. O.,
      “The Organization of Behavior, A Neuropsychological Theory,”
       New York:John Wiley and Sons, 1949

    10. Hebb, D. O.,
        “Distinctive Features of Learning in the Higher Animal,”
        “Brain Mechanisms and Learning—A Symposium,”
         organized by the Council for International Organizations of
         Medical Science, Oxford:Blackwell Scientific Publications, 1961

    11. Konorski, J.,
        “Conditioned Reflexes and Neuron Organization,”
         Cambridge:Cambridge University Press, 1948

    12. Lillie, R. S.,
        “Factors Affecting the Transmission and Recovery in the Passive
         Iron Nerve Model,”
        _J. Gen. Physiol._ =4=:473 (1925)

    13. Lillie, R. S., _Biol. Rev._ =16=:216 (1936)

    14. Matumoto, M., and Goto, K.,
        “A New Type of Nerve Conduction Model,”
        _The Gurma Journal of Medical Sciences_ =4(No. 1)= (1955)

    15. McCulloch, W. S., and Pitts, W.,
        “A Logical Calculus of the Ideas Immanent in Nervous Activity,”
        _Bulletin of Mathematical Biophysics_ =5=:115-133 (1943)

    16. Morrell, F.,
        “Electrophysiological Contributions to the Neural
         Basis of Learning,”
        _Physiological Reviews_ =41(No. 3)= (1961)

    17. Pask, G.,
        “The Growth Process Inside the Cybernetic Machine,”
        _Proc. 2nd Congress International Association Cybernetics_,
         Gauthier-Villars, Paris:Namur, 1958

    18. Retzlaff, E.,
        “Neurohistological Basis for the Functioning of Paired
         Half-Centers,”
        _J. Comp. Neurology_ =101=:407-443 (1954)

    19. Sperry, R. W.,
        “Neurology and the Mind-Brain Problem,”
        _Amer. Scientist_ =40(No. 2)=: 291-312 (1952)

    20. Tasaki, I., and Bak, A. F.,
       _J. Gen. Physiol._ =42=:899 (1959)

    21. Thorpe, W. H.,
        “The Concepts of Learning and Their Relation to Those of
         Instinct,”
         S. E. B. Symposia, No. IV,
        “Physiological Mechanisms in Animal Behavior,”
         Cambridge:University Press, USA:Academic Press, Inc., 1950

    22. Yamagiwa, K.,
        “The Interaction in Various Manifestations
         (Observations on Lillie’s Nerve Model),”
        _Jap. J. Physiol._ =1=:40-54 (1950)

    23. Young, J. Z.,
        “The Evolution of the Nervous System and of the
         Relationship of Organism and Environment,”
         G. R. de Beer, ed.,
        “Evolution,”
         Oxford:Clarendon Press, pp. 179-204, 1938

    24. Young, J. Z.,
        “Doubt and Certainty in Science, A Biologist’s Reflections
         on the Brain,”
         New York:Oxford Press, 1951




Multi-Layer Learning Networks


               R. A. STAFFORD

    _Philco Corp., Aeronutronic Division
         Newport Beach, California_


INTRODUCTION

This paper is concerned with the problem of designing a network of
linear threshold elements capable of efficiently adapting its various
sets of weights so as to produce a prescribed input-output relation.
It is to accomplish this adaptation by being repetitively presented
with the various inputs along with the corresponding desired outputs.
We will not be concerned here with the further requirement of various
kinds of ability to “generalize”—_i.e._, to tend to give correct
outputs for inputs that have not previously occurred when they are
similar in some transformed sense to other inputs that have occurred.

In putting forth a model for such an adapting or “learning” network, a
requirement is laid down that the complexity of the adaption process
in terms of interconnections among elements needed for producing
appropriate weight changes, should not greatly exceed that already
required to produce outputs from inputs with a static set of weights.
In fact, it has been found possible to use the output-from-input
computing capacity of the network to help choose proper weight changes
by observing the effect on the output of a variety of possible weight
changes.

No attempt is made here to defend the proposed network model on
theoretical grounds since no effective theory is known at present.
Instead, the plausibility of the various aspects of the network model,
combined with empirical results must suffice.


SINGLE ELEMENTS

To simplify the problem it is assumed that the network receives a set
of two-valued inputs, x₁, x₂, ..., xₙ, and is required to produce only
a single two-valued output, y. It is convenient to assign the numerical
quantities +1 and -1 to the two values of each variable.

The simplest network would consist of a single linear threshold
element with a set of weights, c₀, c₁, c₂, ..., cₙ. These determine
the output-input relation or function so that y is +1 or -1 according
as the quantity, c₀ + c₁x₁ + c₂x₂ + ... + cₙxₙ, is positive or not,
respectively. It is possible for such a single element to exhibit an
adaptive behavior as follows. If, for a given set, x₁, x₂, ..., xₙ, the
output, y, is correct, then make no changes to the weights. Otherwise
change the weights according to the equations

Δc₀ = y* Δcᵢ = y*xᵢ, i = 1,2, ...,n

where y* is the desired output.

It has been shown by a number of people that the weights of such an
element are assured of arriving at a set of values which produce the
correct output-input relation after a sufficient number of errors,
provided that such a set exists. An upper bound on the number of
possible errors can be given which depends only on the initial weight
values and the logical function to be learned. This does not, however,
solve our network problem for two reasons.

First, as the number, n, of inputs gets large, the number of errors
to be expected for most functions which can be learned increases to
unreasonable values. For example, for n = 6, most such functions
result in 500 to 1000 errors compared to an average of 32 errors to be
expected in a perfect learning device.

Second, and more important, the fraction of those logical functions
which can be generated in a single element becomes vanishingly small as
n increases. For example, at n = 6 less than one in each three trillion
logical functions is so obtainable.


NETWORKS OF ELEMENTS

It can be demonstrated that if a sufficiently large number of linear
threshold elements is used, with the outputs of some being the inputs
of others, then a final output can be produced which is any desired
logical function of the inputs. The difficulty in such a network lies
in the fact that we are no longer provided with a knowledge of the
correct output for each element, but only for the final output. If the
final output is incorrect there is no obvious way to determine which
sets of weights should be altered.

As a result of considerable study and experimentation at Aeronutronic,
a network model has been evolved which, it is felt, will get around
these difficulties. It consists of four basic features which will now
be described.


Positive Interconnecting Weights

It is proposed that all weights in elements attached to inputs which
come from other elements in the network be restricted to positive
values. (Weights attached to the original inputs to the network, of
course, must be allowed to be of either sign.) The reason for such a
restriction is this. If element 1 is an input to element 2 with weight
c₁₂, element 2 to element 3 with weight c₂₃, _etc._, then the sign of
the product, c₁₂c₂₃ ..., gives the sense of the effect of a change in
the output of element 1 on the final element in the chain (assuming
this is the only such chain between the two elements). If these various
weights were of either possible sign, then a decision as to whether or
not to change the output in element 1 to help correct an error in the
final element would involve all weights in the chain. Moreover, since
there would in general be a multiplicity of such chains, the decision
is rendered impossibly difficult.

The above restriction removes this difficulty. If the output of any
element in the network is changed, say, from -1 to +1, the effect on
the final element, if it is affected at all, is in the same direction.

It should be noted that this restriction does not seriously affect
the logical capabilities of a network. In fact, if a certain logical
function can be achieved in a network with the use of weights of
unrestricted sign, then the same function can be generated in another
network with only positive interconnecting weights and, at worst, twice
the number of elements. In the worst case this is done by generating
in the restricted network both the output and its complement for each
element of the unrestricted network. (It is assumed that there are no
loops in the network.)


A Variable Bias

The central problem in network learning is that of determining, for
a given input, the set of elements whose outputs can be altered so
as to correct the final element, and which will do the least amount
of damage to previous adaptations to other inputs. Once this set has
been determined, the incrementing rule given for a single element will
apply in this case as well (subject to the restriction of leaving
interconnecting weights positive), since the desired final output
coincides with that desired for each of the elements to be changed
(because of positive interconnecting weights).

In the process of arriving at such a decision three factors need to be
considered. Elements selected for change should tend to be those whose
output would thereby be affected for a minimum number of other possible
inputs. At the same time it should be ascertained that a change in
each of the elements in question does indeed contribute significantly
towards correcting the final output. Finally, a minimum number of such
elements should be used.

It would appear at first that this kind of decision is impossible to
achieve if the complexity of the decision apparatus is kept comparable
to that of the basic input-output network as mentioned earlier.
However, in the method to be described it is felt that a reasonable
approximation to these requirements will be achieved without an undue
increase in complexity.

It is assumed that in addition to its normal inputs, each element
receives a variable input bias which we can call b. The output of every
element should then be determined by the sign of the usual weighted
sum of its inputs plus this bias quantity. This bias is to be the same
for each element of the network. If b = 0 the network will behave
as before. However, if b is increased gradually, various elements
throughout the network will commence changing from -1 to +1, with one
or a few changing at any one time as a rule. If b is decreased, the
opposite will occur.

Now suppose that for a given input the final output ought to be +1 but
actually is -1. Assume that b is then raised so high that this final
output is corrected. Then commence a gradual decline in b. Various
elements may revert to -1, but until the final output does, no weights
are changed. When the final output does revert to -1, it is due to an
element’s having a sum (weighted sum plus bias) which just passed down
through zero. This then caused a chain effect of changing elements
up to the final element, but presumably this element is the only one
possessing a zero sum. This can then be the signal for the weights
on an element to change—a change of final output from right to wrong
accompanied simultaneously by a zero sum in the element itself.

After such a weight change, the final output will be correct once more
and the bias can again proceed to fall. Before it reaches zero, this
process may occur a number of times throughout the network. When the
bias finally stands at zero with the final output correct, the network
is ready for the next input. Of course if -1 is desired, the bias will
change in the opposite direction.

It is possible that extending the weight change process a little past
the zero bias level may have beneficial results. This might increase
the life expectancy of each learned input-output combination and
thereby reduce the total number of errors. This is because the method
used above can stop the weight correction process so that even though
the final output is correct, some elements whose output are essential
to the final output have sums close to zero, which are easily changed
by subsequent weight changes.

It will be noted that this method conforms to all three considerations
mentioned previously. First, by furnishing each element the same bias,
and by not changing weights until the final output becomes incorrect
with dropping bias, there is a strong tendency to select elements
which, with b = 0, would have sums close to zero. But the size of the
sum in an element is a good measure of the amount of damage done to
an element for other inputs if its current output is to be changed.
Second, it is obvious that each element changed has had a demonstrable
effect on the final output. Finally, there will be a clear tendency to
change only a minimum of elements because changes never occur until the
output clearly requires a change.

On the other hand this method requires little more added complexity to
the network than it already has. Each element requires a bias, an error
signal, and the desired final output, these things being uniform for
all elements in a network. Some external device must manipulate the
bias properly, but this is a simple behavior depending only on an error
signal and the desired final output—not on the state of individual
elements in the network. What one has, then, is a network consisting
of elements which are nearly autonomous as regards their decisions
to change weights. Such a scheme appears to be the only way to avoid
constructing a central weight-change decision apparatus of great
complexity. This rather sophisticated decision is made possible by
utilizing the computational capabilities the network already possesses
in producing outputs from inputs.

It should be noted here that this varying bias method requires that
the variable bias be furnished to just those elements which have
variable weights and to no others. Any fixed portion of the network,
such as preliminary layers or final majority function for example,
must operate independently of the variable bias. Otherwise, the final
output may go from right to wrong as the bias moves towards zero and no
variable-weight element be to blame. In such a case the network would
be hung up.


Logical Redundancy in the Network

A third aspect of the network model is that for all the care taken
in the previous steps, they will not suffice in settling quickly to
a set of weights that will generate the required logical function
unless there is a great multiplicity of ways in which this can be done.
This is to say that a learning network needs to have an excess margin
of weights and elements beyond the minimum required to generate the
functions which are to be learned.

This is analogous to the situation that prevails for a single element
as regards the allowed range of values on its weights. It can be shown
for example, that any function for n=6 that can be generated by a
single element can be obtained with each weight restricted to the range
of integer values -9,-8, ..., +9. Yet no modification of the stated
weight change rule is known which restricts weight values to these and
yet has any chance of ever being learned for most functions.


Fatigued Elements

It would appear from some of the preliminary results of network
simulations that it may be useful to have elements become “fatigued”
after undergoing an excessive number of weight changes. Experiments
have been performed on simplifications of the model described so far
which had the occasional result that a small number of elements came
to a state where they received most of the weight increments, much
to the detriment of the learning process. In such cases the network
behaves as if it were composed of many fewer adjustable elements. In a
sense this is asking each element to maintain a record of the data it
is being asked to store so that it does not attempt to exceed its own
information capacity.

It is not certain just how this fatigue factor should enter in the
element’s actions, but if it is to be compatible with the variable bias
method, this fatigue factor must enter into the element’s response to
a changing bias. Once an element changes state with zero sum at the
same time that the final output becomes wrong, incrementing must occur
if the method is to work. Hence a “fatigued” element must respond less
energetically to a change of bias, perhaps with a kind of variable
factor to be multiplied by the bias term.


NETWORK STRUCTURE

It is felt that the problem of selecting the structure of
interconnections for a network is intimately connected to the
previously mentioned problem of generalization. Presumably a given
type of generalization can be obtained by providing appropriate fixed
portions of the network and an appropriate interconnection structure
for the variable portion. However, for very large networks, it is
undoubtedly necessary to restrict the complexity so that it can be
specified by relatively simple rules. Since very little is known about
this quite important problem, no further discussion will be attempted
here.


COMPUTER SIMULATION RESULTS

A computer simulation of some of the network features previously
described has been made on an IBM 7090. Networks with an excess of
elements and with only positive interconnecting weights were used.
However, in place of the variable bias method, a simple choice of the
element of sum closest to, and on the wrong side of, zero was made
without regard to the effectiveness of the element in correcting the
final output. No fatigue factors were used.

The results of these simulations are very encouraging, but at the same
time indicate the need for the more sophisticated methods. No attempt
will be made here to describe the results completely.

In one series of learning experiments, a 22-element network was used
which had three layers, 10 elements on the first, 11 on the second, and
1 on the third. The single element on the third was the final output,
and was a fixed majority function of the 11 elements in the second
layer. These in turn each received inputs from each of the 10 on the
first layer and from each of the 6 basic inputs. The 10 on the first
layer each received only the 6 basic inputs. A set of four logical
functions, A, B, C, and D, was used. Function A was actually a linear
threshold function which could be generated by the weights 8, 7, 6, 5,
4, 3, 2, functions B and C were chosen by randomly filling in a truth
table, while D was the parity function.

                TABLE I
    -------+--------+---------+-------
       A   |    B   |     C   |    D
     r   e |  r   e |   r   e |  r   e
    -------+--------+---------+-------
     5  54 |  8 100 |  11 101 |  4  52
     4  37 |  9  85 |   4  60 |  5  62
     4  44 |  6  72 |   9  85 |  6  56
    -------+--------+---------+-------

Table I gives the results of one series of runs with these functions
and this network, starting with various random initial weights. The
quantity, r, is the number of complete passes through the 64-entry
truth table before the function was completely learned, while e is
the total number of errors made. In evaluating the results it should
be noted that an ideal learning device would make an average of 32
errors altogether on each run. The totals recorded in these runs are
agreeably close to this ideal. As expected, the linear threshold
function is the easiest to learn, but it is surprising that the
parity function was substantially easier than the two randomly chosen
functions. Table II gives a chastening result of the same experiment
with all interconnecting weights removed except that the final element
is a fixed majority function of the other 21 elements. Thus there was
adaptation on one layer only. As can be seen Table I is hardly better
than Table II so that the value of variable interconnecting weights was
not being fully realized. In a later experiment the number of elements
was reduced to 12 elements and the same functions used. In this case
the presence of extra interconnecting weights actually proved to be
a hindrance! However a close examination of the incrementing process
brought out the fact that the troublesome behavior was due to the
greater chance of having only a few (often only one) elements do nearly
all the incrementing. It is expected that the use of the additional
refinements discussed herein will produce a considerable improvement
in bringing out the full power of adaptation in multiple layers of a
network.

                TABLE II
    -------+--------+---------+-------
       A   |    B   |    C    |   D
     r   e |  r   e |  r    e | r   e
    -------+--------+---------+-------
     7  47 | 18 192 |  8  110 | 4  48
     3  40 |  7  69 | 10   98 | 6  68
     4  43 |  7  82 |  4   47 | 6  46
    -------+--------+---------+-------


FUTURE PROBLEMS

Aside from the previous question of deciding on network structure,
there are several other questions that remain to be studied in learning
networks.

There is the question of requiring more than a single output from a
network. If, say, two outputs are required for a given input, one
+1 and the other -1, this runs into conflict with the incrementing
process. Changes that aid one output may act against the other.
Apparently the searching process depicted before with a varying bias
must be considerably refined to find weight changes which act on
all the outputs in the required way. This is far from an academic
question because there will undoubtedly be numerous cases in which
the greatest part of the input-output computation will have shared
features for all output variables. Only at later levels do they need to
be differentiated. Hence it is necessary to envision a single network
producing multiple outputs rather than a separate network for each
output variable if full efficiency is to be achieved.

Another related question is that of using input variables that are
either many-, or continuous-, valued rather than two-valued. No
fundamental difficulties are discernible in this case, but the matter
deserves some considerable study and experimentation.

Another important question involves the use of a succession of inputs
for producing an output. That is, it may be useful to allow time to
enter into the network’s logical action, thus giving it a “dynamic” as
well as “static” capability.




Adaptive Detection of Unknown Binary Waveforms


               J. J. SPILKER, JR.

    _Philco Western Development Laboratories
             Palo Alto, California_

    This work was supported by the Philco WDL
    Independent Development Program. This paper,
    submitted after the Symposium, represents a
    more detailed presentation of some of the
    issues raised in the discussion sessions at the
    Symposium and hence, constitutes a worthwhile
    addition to the Proceedings.


INTRODUCTION

One of the most important objectives in processing a stream of
data is to determine and detect the presence of any invariant or
quasi-invariant “features” in that data stream. These features are
often initially unknown and must be “learned” from the observations.
One of the simplest features of this form is a finite length signal
which occurs repetitively, but not necessarily periodically with time,
and has a waveshape that remains invariant or varies only slowly with
time.

In this discussion, we assume that the data stream has been
pre-processed, perhaps by a detector or discriminator, so as to exhibit
this type of repetitive (but unknown) waveshape or signal structure.
The observed signal, however, is perturbed by additive noise or other
disturbances. It is desired to separate the quasi-invariance of the
data from the truly random environment. The repetitive waveform may
represent, for example, the transmission of an unknown sonar or radar,
a pulse-position modulated noise-like waveform, or a repeated code word.

The problem of concern is to estimate the signal waveshape and to
determine the time of each signal occurrence. We limit this discussion
to the situation where only a single repetitive waveform is present
and the signal sample values are binary. The observed waveform is
assumed to be received at low signal-to-noise ratio so that a single
observation of the signal (even if one knew precisely the arrival time)
is not sufficient to provide a good estimate of the signal waveshape.
The occurrence time of each signal is assumed to be random.


THE ADAPTIVE DETECTION MACHINE

The purpose of this note is to describe very briefly a machine[2] which
has been implemented to recover the noise-perturbed binary waveform.
A simplified block diagram of the machine is shown in Figure 1. The
experimental machine has been designed to operate on signals of 10³
samples duration.

[2] The operation of this machine is described in substantially greater
detail in J. J. Spilker, Jr., D. D. Luby, R. D. Lawhorn, “Adaptive
Binary Waveform Detection,” Philco Western Development Laboratories,
Communication Sciences Department, TR #75, December 1963.

Each analog input sample enters the machine at left and may either
contain a signal sample plus noise or noise alone. In order to permit
digital operation in the machine, the samples are quantized in a
symmetrical three-level quantizer. The samples are then converted
to vector form, _e.g._, the previous 10³ samples form the vector
components. A new input vector, ⮕Y⁽ⁱ⁾, is formed at each sample instant.

Define the signal sample values as s₁, s₂, ..., sₙ. The observed vector
Y⁽ⁱ⁾ is then either (a) perfectly centered signal plus noise, (b)
shifted signal plus noise, or (c) noise alone.

             { (s₁, s₂, ..., sₙ) + (n₁, n₂, ..., nₙ)             (a)
    (Y⁽ⁱ⁾)ᵗ = { (0, ..., s₁, s₂, ..., sₙ₋ⱼ) + (n₁, n₂, ..., nₙ)   (b)
             { (0 ... 0) + (n₁, n₂, ..., nₙ)                     (c)

At each sample instant, two measurements are made on the input
vector, an energy measurement ‖Y⁽ⁱ⁾‖² and a polarity coincidence
cross-correlation with the present estimate of the signal vector stored
in memory. If the weighted sum of the energy and cross-correlation
measurements exceeds the present threshold value Γᵢ, the input vector
is accepted as containing the signal (properly shifted in time), and
the input vector is added to the memory. The adaptive memory has 2^{Q}
levels, 2^{Q-1} positive levels, 1 zero level and 2^{Q-1}-1 negative
levels. New contributions are made to the memory by normal vector
addition except that saturation occurs when a component value is at the
maximum or minimum level.

The acceptance or rejection of a given input vector is based on a
hypersphere decision boundary. The input vector is accepted if the
weighted sum γᵢ exceeds the threshold Γᵢ

    γᵢ = Y⁽ⁱ⁾∙M⁽ⁱ⁾ + α‖Y⁽ⁱ⁾‖² ⩾ Γᵢ.

[Illustration: Figure 1—Block diagram of the adaptive binary waveform
detector]

Geometrically, we see that the input vector is accepted if it falls on
or outside of a hypersphere centered at ⮕C⁽ⁱ⁾ = -⮕M⁽ⁱ⁾/2α having radius
squared

              Γ⁽ⁱ⁾  ‖M⁽ⁱ⁾‖²
    [r⁽ⁱ⁾]² = ——— + —————— .
               α    (2α)²

Both the center and radius of this hypersphere change as the machine
adapts. The performance and optimality of hypersphere-type decision
boundaries have been _discussed in related work_ by Glaser[3] and
Cooper.[4]

[3] F. M. Glaser, “Signal Detection by Adaptive Filters,” _IRE Trans.
Information Theory_, pp. 87-90; April 1961.

[4] P. W. Cooper, “The Hypersphere in Pattern Recognition,”
_Information and Control_, pp. 324-346; December 1962.

The threshold value, Γᵢ, is adapted so that it increases if the
memory becomes a better replica of the signal with the result that γᵢ
increases. On the other hand, if the memory is a poor replica of the
signal (for example, if it contains noise alone), it is necessary that
the threshold decay with time to the point where additional acceptances
can modify the memory structure.

The experimental machine is entirely digital in operation and, as
stated above, is capable of recovering waveforms of up to 10³ samples
in duration. In a typical experiment, one might attempt to recover
an unknown noise-perturbed, pseudo-random waveform of up to 10³ bits
duration which occurs at random intervals. If no information is
available as to the signal waveshape, the adaptive memory is blank at
the start of the experiment.

In order to illustrate the operation of the machine most clearly, let
us consider a repetitive binary waveform which is composed of 10³ bits
of alternate “zeros” and “ones.” A portion of this waveform is shown in
Figure 2a. The waveform actually observed is a noise-perturbed version
of this waveform shown in Figure 2b at-6 db signal-to-noise ratio. The
exact sign of each of the signal bits obviously could not be accurately
determined by direct observation of Figure 2b.

[Illustration: (a) Binary signal]

[Illustration: (b) Binary signal plus noise

Figure 2—Binary signal with additive noise at-6 db SNR]

[Illustration: (a) (b)]

[Illustration: (c) (d)]

[Illustration: (e)

Figure 3—Adaption of the memory at-6 db SNR: (a) Blank initial memory;
(b) Memory after first dump; (c) Memory after 12 dumps; (d) Memory
after 40 dumps; (e) Perfect “checkerboard” memory for comparison]

As the machine memory adapts to this noisy input signal, it progresses
as shown in Figure 3. The sign of 10^{3} memory components are
displayed in a raster pattern in this figure. Figure 3a shows the
memory in its blank initial state at the start of the adaption process.
Figure 3b shows the memory after the first adaption of the memory. This
first “dump” occurred after the threshold had decayed to the point
where an energy measurement produced an acceptance decision. Figure
3c and 3d show the memory after 12 and 40 adaptions, respectively.
These dumps, of course, are based on both energy and cross-correlation
measurements. As can be seen, the adapted memory after 40 dumps is
already quite close to the perfect memory shown by the “checkerboard”
pattern of Figure 3c.

The detailed analysis of the performance of this type of machine
vs. signal-to-noise ratio, average signal repetition rate, signal
duration, and machine parameters is extremely complex. Therefore, it
is not appropriate here to detail the results of the analytical and
experimental work on the performance of this machine. However, several
conclusions of a general nature can be stated.

    (a) Because the machine memory is always adapting, there
        is a relatively high penalty for “false alarms.”
        False alarms can destroy a perfect memory. Hence,
        the threshold level needs to be set appropriately
        high for the memory adaption. If one wishes to
        detect signal occurrences with more tolerance to
        false alarms, a separate comparator and threshold
        level should be used.

    (b) The present machine structure, which allows for
        slowly varying changes in the signal waveshape,
        exhibits a marked threshold effect in steady-state
        performance at an input signal-to-noise ratio
        (peak signal power-to-average noise power ratio)
        of about -12 db. Below this signal level, the time
        required for convergence increases very rapidly with
        decreasing signal level. At higher SNR, convergence
        to noise-like signals, having good auto-correlation
        properties, occurs at a satisfactory rate.

A more detailed discussion of performance has been published in the
report cited in footnote reference 1.




Conceptual Design of Self-Organizing Machines


                   P. A. KLEYN

                _Northrop Nortronics_
             _Systems Support Department_
                _Anaheim, California_

    Self-organization is defined and several examples
    which motivate this definition are presented. The
    significance of this definition is explored by
    comparison with the metrization problem discussed
    in the companion paper (1) and it is seen that
    self-organization requires decomposing the space
    representing the environment. In the absence
    of a priori knowledge of the environment, the
    self-organizing machine must resort to a sequence
    of projections on unit spheres to effect this
    decomposition. Such a sequence of projections
    can be provided by repeated use of a nilpotent
    projection operator (NPO). An analog computer
    mechanization of one such NPO is discussed
    and the signal processing behavior of the NPO
    is presented in detail using the Euclidean
    geometrical representation of the metrizable
    topology provided in the companion paper.
    Self-organizing systems using multiple NPO’s
    are discussed and current areas of research are
    identified.


INTRODUCTION

Unlike the companion paper which considers certain questions in
depth, this paper presents a survey of the scope of our work in
self-organizing systems and is not intended to be profound.

The approach we have followed may be called phenomenological (Figure
1). That is, the desired behavior (self-organization) was defined,
represented mathematically, and a mechanism(s) required to yield the
postulated behavior was synthesized using mathematical techniques. One
advantage of this approach is that it avoids assumptions of uniqueness
of the mechanism. Another advantage is that the desired behavior, which
is after all the principal objective, is taken as invariant. An obvious
disadvantage is the requirement for the aforementioned synthesis
technique; fortunately in our case a sufficiently general technique had
been developed by the author of the companion paper.

From the foregoing and from the definition of self-organization we
employ (see conceptual model), it would appear that our research does
not fit comfortably within any of the well publicized approaches to
self-organization (2). Philosophically, we lean toward viewpoints
expressed by Ashby (3), (4), Hawkins (5), and Mesarovic (6) but with
certain reservations. We have avoided the neural net approach partly
because it is receiving considerable attention and also because the
brain mechanism need not be the unique way to produce the desired
behavior.

[Illustration: Figure 1—Approach used in Nortronics research on
self-organizing systems]

Nor have we followed the probability computer or statistical decision
theory approach exemplified by Braverman (7) because these usually
require some sort of preassigned coordinate system (8). Neither will
the reader find much indication of formal logic (9) or heuristic (10)
programming. Instead, we view a self-organizing system more as a mirror
whose appearance reflects the environment rather than its own intrinsic
nature. With this viewpoint, a self-organizing system appears very
flexible because it possesses few internal constraints which would tend
to distort the reflection of the environment and hinder its ability to
adapt.


CONCEPTUAL MODEL

Definition

A system is said to be self-organizing if, after observing the input
and output of an unknown phenomenon (transfer relation), the system
organizes itself into a simulation of the unknown phenomenon.

Implicit in this definition is the requirement that the self-organizing
machine (SOM) not possess a preassigned coordinate system. In fact it
is just this ability to acquire that coordinate system implicit in the
input-output spaces which define the phenomenon that we designate as
self-organization. Thus any a priori information programmed into the
SOM by means of, for example, stored or wired programs, constrains
the SOM and limits its ability to adapt. We do not mean to suggest
that such preprogramming is not useful or desirable; merely that it is
inconsistent with the requirement for self-organization. As shown in
Figure 2, it is the given portion of the environment which the SOM is
to simulate, which via the defining end spaces, furnishes the SOM with
all the data it needs to construct the coordinate system intrinsic to
those spaces.

The motivation for requiring the ability to simulate as a feature of
self-organization stems from the following examples.

Consider the operation of driving an automobile. Figure 3 depicts the
relation characterized by a set of inputs; steering, throttle, brakes,
transmission, and a set of outputs; the trajectory. Operation of the
automobile requires a device (SOM) which for a desired trajectory can
furnish those inputs which realize the desired trajectory. In order to
provide the proper inputs to the automobile, the SOM must contain a
simulation of ⨍⁻¹(x).

[Illustration: Figure 2—Simulation of (a portion of) the environment]

[Illustration: Figure 3—Simulation of a relation]

Since ⨍(x) is completely defined in terms of the inputs and the
resulting trajectories, exposure to them provide the SOM with all the
information necessary to simulate ⨍⁻¹(x). And if the SOM possesses
internal processes which cause rearrangement of the input-output
relation of the SOM to correspond to ⨍⁻¹(x) in accordance with the
observed data, the SOM can operate an automobile. It is this internal
change which is implied by the term “self-organizing,” but note that
the instructions which specify the desired organization have their
source in the environment.

As a second example consider adaptation to the environment. Adapt
(from Webster) means: “to change (oneself) so that one’s behavior,
attitudes, _etc._, will conform to new or changed circumstances.
Adaptation in biology means a change in structure, function or form
that produces better adjustment to the environment.” These statements
suggest a simulation because adjustment to the environment implies
survival by exposing the organism to the beneficial rather than the
inimical effects of the environment. If we represent the environment
(or portion thereof) as a relation as shown in Figure 2, we note that
the ability to predict what effect a given disturbance will have is due
to a simulation of the cause-effect relation which characterizes the
environment.

It would be a mistake to infer from these examples that simulation
preserves the appearance of the causes and effects which characterize
a relation. We clarify this situation by examining a relation and its
simulation.

Consider the relation between two mothers and their sons as pictured
in Figure 4. Observe that if symbols (points) are substituted for the
actual physical objects (mothers and sons), the relation is not altered
in any way. This is what we mean by simulation and this is how a SOM
simulates. It is not even necessary that the objects, used to display
the relation, be defined; _i.e._, these objects may be primitive.
(If this were not so, no mathematical or physical theory could model
the environment.) The main prerequisite is sufficient resolution to
distinguish the objects from each other.

[Illustration: Figure 4—A relation of objects—displayed and simulated]


MATHEMATICAL MODEL

The mathematical model must represent both the environment and the SOM
and for reasons given in the companion paper each is represented as a
metrizable topology. For uniqueness we factor each space into equal
parts and represent the environment as the channel

W ⟶ X. (Ref. 10a)

Consider now the SOM to be represented by the cascaded channels

X ⟶ Y ⟶ Z

where X ⟶ Y is a variable which represents the reorganization of the
SOM existing input-output relation represented by Y ⟶ Z.

The solution of the three channels-in-cascade problem

W ⟶ X ⟶ Y ⟶ Z,

where p(W) (11), p(X), p(X|W), p(Y), p(Z), p(Z|Y) are fixed, yields
that middle channel p₀(Y|X), from a set of permissible middle channels
{p(Y|X)}, which maximizes R(Z,W).

Then the resulting middle channel describes that reorganization of the
SOM which yields the optimum simulation of W ⟶ X by the SOM, within the
constraints upon Ch(Z,Y).

The solution (the middle channel) depends of course on the particular
end channels. Obviously the algorithm which is used to find the
solution does not. It follows that if some physical process were
constrained to carrying out the steps specified by the algorithm,
said process would be capable of simulation and would exhibit
self-organization.

Although the formal solution to the three-channels-in-cascade problem
is not complete, the solution is sufficiently well characterized to
permit proceeding with a mechanization of the algorithm. A considerable
portion of the solution is concerned with the decomposition and
metrization of channels and it is upon this feature that we now focus
attention.

As suggested in the companion paper, if the dimensionality of the
spaces is greater than one, the SOM has only one method available (12).
Consider the decomposition of a space without, for the moment, making
the distinction between input and output.

Figure 5 depicts objects represented by a (perhaps multidimensional)
“cloud” of points. In the absence of a preassigned coordinate system,
the SOM computes the center of gravity of the cloud (which can be
done in any coordinate system) and describes the points in terms of
the distance from this center of gravity; or, which is the same, as
concentric spheres with origin at the center of gravity.

[Illustration: Figure 5—Nilpotent decomposition of a three-dimensional
space]

The direction of particular point cannot be specified for there is no
reference radius vector. Since the SOM wants to end up with a cartesian
coordinate system, it must transform the sphere (a two-dimensional
surface) into a plane (a two-dimensional surface). Unfortunately, a
sphere is not homeomorphic to a plane; thus the SOM has to decompose
the sphere into a cartesian product of a hemisphere (12a) and a
denumerable group. The SOM then can transform the hemisphere into a
plane. The points projected onto the plane constitute a space of the
same character as the one with which the SOM started. Thus, it can
repeat all operations on the plane (a space of one less dimension) by
finding the center of gravity and the circle upon which the desired
point is situated. The circle is similarly decomposed into a line times
a denumerable group. By repeating this operation as many times as the
space has dimensions, the SOM eventually arrives at a single point and
has obtained in the process a description of the space. Since this
procedure can be carried on by the repeated use of one operator, this
operator is nilpotent and to reflect this fact as well as the use of a
projection, we have named this a nilpotent projection operator or NPO
for short.


MECHANIZATION OF THE NPO

Analog computer elements were used to simulate one NPO which was
tested in the experimental configuration shown in Figure 6. The NPO
operates upon a channel which is artificially generated from the two
noise generators i₁ and i₂ and the signal generator i₀ (i₀ may also be
a noise generator). The NPO accepts the inputs labelled X₁ and X₂ and
provides the three outputs Ξ₁, Ξ₂, and γ. X₁ is the linear combination
of the outputs of generators i₁ and i₀, similarly X₂ is obtained from
i₂ and i₀.

[Illustration: Figure 6—Experimental test configuration for the
simulation of an NPO]

Obviously, i₀ is an important parameter since it represents the memory
relating the spaces X₁ and X₂. Ξ₁ has the property that the magnitude
of its projection on i₀ is a maximum while Ξ₂ to the opposite has a
zero projection on i₀. γ is the detected version of the eigenvalue of
Ch(X₂,X₁).

In the companion paper it was shown how one can provide a Euclidean
geometrical representation of the NPO. This representation is shown in
Figure 7 which shows the vectors i₀, i₁, i₂, X₁, X₂, Ξ₁, Ξ₂, and the
angles Θ₁, Θ₂, and γ. The length of a vector is given by

|X| = κₓ(2πε)⁻¹ᐟ² ∈ H(X)

and the angle between two vectors by

|Θ(X₁,X₂)|-sin⁻¹ ∈ -R(X₁,X₂).

The three vectors i₀, i₁, i₂ provide an orthogonal coordinate system
because the corresponding signals are random, _i.e._,

                κ
    R(i₀,i₁,i₂) ≡ 0.

As external observers we have a prior knowledge of this coordinate
system; however, the NPO is given only the vectors X₁ and X₂ in the i₀
⨉ i₁ and i₀ ⨉ i₂ planes. The NPO can reconstruct the entire geometry
but the actual output Ξ obviously is constrained to lie in the plane of
the input vector X. The following formulas are typical of the relations
present.

              |Ξ₁|
      tan β = ————
              |Ξ₂|

      cos Θ = cos 2β csc 2γ

                     cos 2β
    cos 2Θ₁ = -1 + 2 ———————
                     1-cos 2γ

      cos Θ = cos Θ₁ cos Θ₂.

[Illustration: Figure 7—Geometry of the NPO]

[Illustration: Figure 8—NPO run number 5]

[Illustration: Figure 9—NPO run number 6]

We have obtained a complete description of the NPO which involves 74
formulas. These treat the noise in the various outputs, invariances of
the NPO and other interesting features. A presentation of these would
be outside of the scope of this paper and would tend to obscure the
main features of the NPO. Thus, we show here only a typical sample of
the computer simulation, Figure 8 and Figure 9. Conditions for these
runs are shown in Table I. Run No. 6 duplicates run No. 5 except for
the fact that i₁ and i₂ were disabled in run No. 6.

Observe that all our descriptions of the NPO and the space it is to
decompose have been time invariant while the signals shown in the
simulation are presented as functions of time. The conversion may be
effected as follows: Given a measurable (single-valued) function

                        x = x(t)t ∊ T
    where
                          μ(T) > 0
    we define the space
                        X = {x = x(t) ∍ t ∊ T}

    and a probability distribution

                            μ(x⁻¹(X′))
                    P(X′) = —————————— X′ open ⊂ X
                               μ(T)
    on that space.

                           TABLE I
                 Legend for Traces of Figures 8 and 9
    ---------+-------+-------+--------+-----+----------+-------+--------
    Trace    |       |       |        |     |          |       |
    Number   |   1   |   2   |    3   |  4  |    5     |   6   |   7
    ---------+-------+-------+--------+-----+----------+-------+--------
    Symbol   |   X₂  | X₁    |    γ   |  β  |    i     | dξ₂/dτ | dξ₁/dτ
    ---------+-------+-------+--------+-----+----------+--------+-------
    run No. 5|       |       |        |     |          |        |
             |       |       |        |     |          |        |
    signal   |7½ Vrms|7½ Vrms| π ptop |     |35.6 m cps|        |
             |       |       |        |     |          |        |
    noise    |16 Vrms|15 Vrms|  π/9   |     |          |        |
             |       |       | ptop[5]|     |sine wave |        |
             |       |       |        |     |          |        |
    DC       |  0    |  0    |        |     |          |        |
             |       |       |        |     |          |        |
    power s/n|  1/4  |  1/4  |  81/1  |     |          |   0    | 1/2[6]
             |       |       |        |     |          |        |
    terminal |       |       |        |     |          |        |
    value    |       |       |  π/4   | π/4 |          |        |
    ---------+-------+-------+--------+-----+----------+--------+-------
    run No. 6|       |       |        |     |          |        |
             |       |       |        |     |          |        |
    signal   |7½ Vrms|7½ Vrms| π ptop |     |35.6 m cps|        |
             |       |       |        |     |          |        |
    noise    |  0    |  0    |  0[7]  |     |sine wave |        |
             |       |       |        |     |          |        |
    DC       | -30V  |  0    |        |     |          |        |
             |       |       |        |     |          |        |
    power s/n|   ∞   |   ∞   |   ∞    |     |          |   0    |  ∞
             |       |       |        |     |          |        |
    terminal |       |       |        |     |          |        |
    value    |       |       | π/4    | π/4 |          |        |
    ---------+-------+-------+--------+-----+----------+--------+-------

[5] Observed from Oscillogram

[6] Computed

[7] Observed from Oscillogram

Then (X,p(X)) is a stochastic space in our usual sense and x(T) is a
stochastic variable. Two immediate consequences are:

P(X) is stationary (P(X) is not a function of t ∊ T), and no question
of ergodicity arises.


NETWORKS OF NPO’S

A network of NPO’s may constitute anything from a SOM to a
preprogrammed detector, depending upon the relative amount of
preprogramming included. Two methods of preprogramming are: (1) Feeding
a signal out of a permanent storage into some of the inputs of the
network of NPO’s. This a priori copy need not be perfect, because the
SOM will measure the angles Θᵢ anyhow. (2) Feedback, which, after all,
is just a way of taking advantage of the storage inherent in any delay
line. (We implicitly assume that any reasonable physical realization
of an NPO will include a delay T between the x input and the ξ output
which is not less than perhaps 10⁻¹ times the time constant of the
internal feedback loop in the γ computation.)

Simulation of channels that possess a discrete component requires
feedback path(s) to generate the required free products of the finitely
generated groups. Then, such a SOM converges to a maximal subgroup of
the group describing the symmetry of the signal that is a free product
available to this SOM.

Because a single NPO with 1 ≤ n₀ ≤ K₀ is isomorphic (provides the same
input to output mapping) to a suitable network of NPO’s with n₀ = 1, it
suffices to study only networks of NPO’s with n₀ = 1.

Figure 10 is largely self-explanatory. Item a is our schematic symbol
for a single NPO with n₀ = 1. Items b, d (including larger feedback
loops), and f are typical of artificial intelligence networks. Item c
is employed to effect the level changing required in order to apply the
three channels in cascade algorithm to the solution of one-dimensional
coding problems. Observe that items c and e are the only configurations
requiring the γ output. Item d may be used as a limiter by making T⁻¹
high compared to the highest frequency present in the signal. Observe
that item e is the only application of NPO’s that requires either the
ξ₂ or β outputs. Item f serves the purpose of handling higher power
levels into and out of what effectively is a single (larger) NPO.

[Illustration]

[Illustration: Figure 10—Some possible networks of NPO’s]


CONCLUSION

The definition of self-organizing behavior suitably represented has
permitted the use of Information Theoretic techniques to synthesize
a (mathematical) mechanism for a self-organizing machine. Physical
mechanization in the form of an NPO has been accomplished and has
introduced the experimental phase of the program. From among the many
items deserving of further study we may mention: more economical
physical mechanization through introduction of modern technology;
identification of networks of NPO’s with their group theoretic
descriptions; analysis of the dimensionality of tasks which a SOM might
be called on to simulate, and prototype SOM applications to related
tasks. It is hoped that progress along these lines can be reported in
the future.




REFERENCES


    1. Ścibor-Marchocki, Romuald I.,
       “A Topological Foundation for Self-Organization,”
        Anaheim, California:Northrop Nortronics, NSS Report 2828,
        November 14, 1963

    2. It is true that our definition is very similar to that proposed
       by Hawkins (reference 5). Compare for example his definition of
       learning machines (page 31 of reference 5). But the subsequent
       developments reviewed therein are different from the one we have
       followed.

    3. Ashby, W. R.,
       “The Set Theory of Mechanism and Homeostasis,”
        Technical Report 7, University of Illinois, September 1962

    4. Ashby, W. R.,
       “Systems and Information,”
       _Transactions PTGME_ =MIL-7=:94-97 (April-July, 1963)

    5. Hawkins, J. K.,
       “Self-Organizing Systems—A Review and Commentary,”
       _Proc. IRE_. =49=:31-48 (January 1961)

    6. Mesarovic, M. D.,
       “On Self Organizational Systems,”
        Spartan Books, pp. 9-36, 1962

    7. Braverman, D.,
       “Learning Filters for Optimum Pattern Recognition,”
       _PGIT_ =IT-8=:280-285 (July 1962)

    8. We make the latter statement despite the fact that we employ a
       statistical treatment of self-organization. We may predict the
       performance of, for example, the NPO by using a statistical
       description, but it does not necessarily follow that the NPO
       computes statistics.

    9. McCulloch, W. S., and Pitts, W.,
       “A Logical Calculus of the Ideas Imminent in Nervous Activity,”
       _Bull-Math. Biophys_ =5=:115 (1943)

    10. Newell, A., Shaw, J. C., and Simon, H. A.,
        “Empirical Explorations of the Logic Theory Machine:
               A Case Study in Heuristic,”
        _Proc. WJCC_, pp. 218-230, 1957

    10a. The spaces W, X, Y, and Z are stochastic spaces; that is,
         each space is defined as the ordered pair (X,p(X)) where
         p(X) = {p(x) ∋ x ∈ X}, p(x) ≥ 0, x ∈ X and ∫x p(x)dx = 1.
         Such spaces possess a metrizable topology.

    11. We use the following convention for probability distributions:
        if the arguments of p( ) are different, they are different
        functions, thus: p(x) ≠ p(y) even if y = x.

    12. One can prove the existence of a metric directly but in order
        to perform the metrization the space has to be decomposed first.
        But decomposing a space without having a metric calls for a neat
        trick, accomplished (as far as we know) only by the method used
        by the SOM.

    12a. In this example we use a hemisphere; in general, it would be
         a spherical cap.




A Topological Foundation for Self-Organization


            R. I. ŚCIBOR-MARCHOCKI

              _Northrop Nortronics_
           _Systems Support Department_
              _Anaheim, California_

    It is shown that by the use of Information
    Theory, any metrizable topology may be metrized
    as an orthogonal Euclidean space (with a random
    Gaussian probability distribution) times
    a denumerable random cartesian product of
    irreducible (wrt direct product) denumerable
    groups. The necessary algorithm to accomplish
    this metrization from a statistical basis is
    presented. If such a basis is unavailable,
    a certain nilpotent projection operator has
    to be used instead, as is shown in detail in
    the companion paper. This operator possesses
    self-organizing features.


INTRODUCTION

In the companion article[8] we will define a self-organizing system
as one which, after observing the input and output of an unknown
phenomenon (transfer relation), organizes itself into a simulation of
the unknown phenomenon.

[8] Kleyn, P. A., “Conceptual Design of Self-Organizing Machines,”
Anaheim, California:Northrop Nortronics, NSS Report 2832, Nov. 14, 1963.

Within the mathematical model, the aforementioned phenomenon may be
represented as a topological space thus omitting for the moment the
(arbitrary) designation of input and output which, as will be shown,
bears on the question of uniqueness. Hence, for the purpose of this
paper, which emphasizes the mathematical foundation, an intelligent
device is taken as one which carries out the task of studying a space
and describing it.

In keeping with the policy that one should not ask someone (or
something) else to do a task that he could not do himself (at least in
principle), let us consider how we would approach such a problem.

In the first place, we have to select the space in which the problem is
to be set. The most general space that we feel capable of tackling is
a metrizable topology. On the other hand, anything less general would
be unnecessarily restrictive. Thus, we choose a metrizable topological
space.

As soon as we have made this choice, we regret it. In order to
improve the situation somewhat, we show that there is no (additional)
loss of generality in using an orthogonal Euclidean space times[9]
a denumerable random cartesian product of irreducible (wrt direct
product) denumerable groups.

This paper provides a survey of the problem and a method for solving
it which is conceptually clear but not very practical. The companion
paper[10] provides a practical method for solving this problem by means
of the successive use of a certain nilpotent projection operator.

[9] Random cartesian product.

[10] Kleyn, P. A., “Conceptual Design of Self-Organizing Machines,”
Anaheim, California:Northrop Nortronics, NSS Report 2832, Nov. 14, 1963.

METRIZATION

We start with a metrizable topological space. There are many equivalent
axiomatizations of a metrizable topology; _e.g._, see Kelley. Perhaps
the easiest way to visualize a metrizable topology is to consider that
one was given a metric space but that he lost his notes in which the
exact form of the metric was written down. Thus one knows that he can
do everything that he could in a metric space, if only he can figure
out how.

The “figuring out how” is by no means trivial. Here, it will be assumed
that a cumulative probability distribution has been obtained on the
space by one of the standard methods; bird in cage,[11] Munroe I,[12]
Munroe II,[13] ordering (see Halmos[14] or Kelley[15]). This cumulative
probability distribution is a function on X onto the interval [0,1] of
real numbers. The inverse of this function, which exists by the Radon
Nikodym theorem, provides a mapping from the real interval onto the
non-trivial portion of X. This mapping induces all of the pleasant
properties of the real numbers on the space X: topological, metric, and
ordering.

Actually, it turns out that, especially if the dimensionality of
the space is greater than one, the foregoing procedure not only
provides one metrization, but many. Indeed, this lack of uniqueness
is what makes the procedure exceedingly difficult. Only by imposing
some additional conditions that result in the existence of a unique
solution, does the problem become tractable.

We choose to impose the additional condition that the resulting metric
space be a Euclidean geometry with a rectangular coordinate system.

[11] Harman, W. W., “Principles of the Statistical Theory of
Communication,” New York, New York:McGraw-Hill, 1963.

[12] Munroe, M. E., “Introduction to Measure and Integration,”
Cambridge, Mass.:Addison-Wesley, 1953.

[13] Munroe, M. E., “Introduction to Measure and Integration,”
Cambridge, Mass.:Addison-Wesley, 1953.

[14] Halmos, P. R., “Measure Theory,” Princeton, New Jersey:D. Van
Nostrand Co., Inc., 1950.

[15] Kelley, J. L., “General Topology,” Princeton, New Jersey:D. Van
Nostrand Co., Inc., 1955.

Even this always does not yield uniqueness, but we will show the
additional restriction that will guarantee uniqueness after the
necessary language is developed. Since all metrizations of a given
metrizable topology are isomorphic, in the quotient class the
orthogonal Euclidean geometry serves the purpose of being a convenient
representative of the unique element resulting from a given metrizable
topology.

Furthermore, the same comment applies to the use of a Gaussian
distribution as the probability distribution on this orthogonal
Euclidean geometry. Namely, the random Gaussian distribution on an
orthogonal Euclidean geometry is a convenient representative member of
the equivalence class which maps into one element (stochastic space) of
the quotient class.


Information Theory

Now, we will show that Information Theory provides the language
necessary to describe the metrization procedure in detail.

It is possible to introduce Information Theory axiomatically by a
suitable generalization of the axioms[16] in Feinstein.[17] But
to simplify the discussion here, we will use the less elegant but
equivalent method of defining certain definite integrals. The
probability density distribution p is defined from the cumulative
probability distribution P by

                P(X′) = ∫X′_{measurable ⊂ X} p(x)dx.  (1)

    Then the information rate H is defined as

                 H(X) = -∫ₓp(x) ln κ p(x)dx            (2)

    where kappa has (carries) the units of X. Finally,
    the channel rate R is defined as

              R(⨀Xᵢ) = ΣH(Xᵢ) - H(X),                  (3)
                I       I

    where X is the denumerable[18] cartesian product space

                    X = ⨂Xᵢ.                           (4)
                        I

[16] Feinstein uses his axioms only in finite space X; _i.e._, card(X)
< K₀.

[17] Feinstein, A., “Foundations of Information Theory,” New York, New
York: McGraw-Hill, 1958.

[18] If I is infinite, certain precautions have to be exercised.

Next, we define the angle Θ

             |Θ(⨀Xᵢ)| = sin⁻¹_e_^{-R(⨀Xᵢ)}        (5)
                                  I
    and the norm

                  |X| = κ(2π_e_)⁻¹ᐟ² _e_^{(HX)}. (6)

    Now, if[19] a statistically independent basis; _i.e._, one for which
                       κ
              R(⨀Xᵢ) ≡ constant,                        (7)
                I

can be provided in terms of one-dimensional components; _i.e._, none
of them can be decomposed further, then it is just the usual problem
of diagonalization of a symmetric matrix by means of a congruence
transformation to provide an orthogonal coordinate system. Furthermore,
for uniqueness, we arrange the spectrum in decreasing order. Then,
by means of the Radon Nikodym theorem applied to each of these
one-dimensional axes, the probability distribution may be made; _e.g._,
Gaussian, if desired. Thus, we obtain the promised orthogonal Euclidean
space.

[19] This “if” is the catch that makes all methods of metrization of a
space of dimensionality higher than one impractical, except the method
of successive projections upon unit spheres centered at the center of
gravity. The method of using that nilpotent projection operator is
described in the companion paper(see footnote page 65).


Channel

At this time we can state the remaining additional condition required
that a decomposition be unique. The index space I has to be partitioned
into exactly two parts, say I′ and I″; _i.e._,

               I′ ∪ I″ = I           (8)

               I′ ∩ I″ = φ,

    such that

               dim(X′) = dim(X″),    (9)

    where

                    X′ = ⨂Xᵢ        (10)
                         I′

                    X″ = ⨂Xᵢ.
                         I″

(If dim (X) is odd, then we have to cheat a little by putting in an
extra random dummy dimension.) And then the decomposition of the space

X = ⨂Xᵢ (11) I

has to be carried out so that this partitioning is preserved.
Since this partitioning is arbitrary (as far as the mathematics is
concerned), it is obvious that a space which is not partitioned will
have many (equivalent) decompositions. On the other hand, if the
partitioning is into more than two parts, then the existence of a
decomposition is not guaranteed.

A slight penalty has to be paid for the use of this partitioning,
namely: instead of eventually obtaining a random cartesian product of
one-dimensional spaces, we obtain an extended channel (with random
input) of single-dimensional channels. It is obvious that if we were
to drop the partitioning temporarily, each such single-dimensional
channel would be further decomposed into two random components. This
decomposition is not unique. But one of these equivalent decompositions
is particularly convenient; namely, that decomposition where we take
the component out of the original X′ and that which is random to it,
say V. This V (as well as the cartesian product of all such V’s,
which of necessity are random) is called the linearly additive noise.
The name “linearly additive” is justified because it is just the
statistical concept isomorphic to the linear addition of vectors in
orthogonal Euclidean geometry. (The proof of this last statement is not
completed as yet.)


Denumerable Space

The procedure for this decomposition was worded to de-emphasize the
possible presence of a denumerable (component of the) space. Such a
component may be given outright; otherwise, it results if the space was
not simply connected. Any denumerable space is zero dimensional, as may
be verified easily from the full information theoretic definition of
dimensionality.

The obvious way of disposing of a denumerable space is to use the
conventional mapping that converts a Stieltjes to a Lebesque integral,
using fixed length segments. (It can be shown that H is invariant
under such a mapping.) Unfortunately, while this mapping followed by
a repetition of the preceding procedure will always solve a given
problem (no new[20] denumerable component _need_ be generated on the
second pass), little insight is provided into the structure of the
resulting space. On the other hand, because channels under cascading
constitute a group, any such denumerable space is a representation of a
denumerable group.

[20] Only non-cyclic irreducible (wrt direct product) denumerable group
components of the old denumerable space will remain.


SUMMARY

In summary, the original metrizable topological space was decomposed
into an orthogonal Euclidean space times[21] a denumerable random
cartesian product of irreducible (wrt direct product) denumerable
groups. Thus, since any individual component of a random cartesian
product may be studied independently of the others, all that one needs
to study is: (1) a Gaussian distribution on a single real axis and (2)
the irreducible denumerable groups.

[21] Random cartesian product.

Finally, it should be emphasized that there are only these two ways
of decomposing a metrizable topology; (1) if a (statistical) basis
is given, use the diagonalization of a symmetric matrix algorithm
described earlier (and given in detail in the three channels in cascade
problem), and (2) otherwise use a suitable network of the NPO’s with
n₀=1. Of course, any hybrid of these two methods may be employed as
well.




On Functional Neuron Modeling


          C. E. HENDRIX

    _Space-General Corporation_
      _El Monte, California_

There are two very compelling reasons why mathematical and physical
models of the neuron should be built. Model building, while widely
used in the physical sciences, has been largely neglected in biology.
However, there can be little doubt that building neuron models
will increase our understanding of the function of real neurons,
if experience in the physical sciences is any guide. Secondly,
neuron models are extremely interesting in their own right as new
technological devices. Hence, the interest in, and the reason for
symposia on self-organizing systems.

We should turn our attention to the properties of real neurons, and
see which of them are the most important ones for us to imitate.
Obviously, we cannot hope to imitate _all_ the properties of a living
neuron, since that would require a complete simulation of a living,
metabolizing cell, and a highly specialized one at that; but we
can select those functional properties which we feel are the most
important, and then try to simulate those.

The most dramatic aspect of neuron function is, of course, the axon
discharge. It is this which gives the neuron its “all-or-nothing”
character, and it is this which provides it with a means for
propagating its output pulses over a distance. Hodgkin and Huxley (1)
have developed a very complete description of this action. Their model
is certainly without peer in describing the nature of the real neuron.

On the technological side, Cranes’ “neuristors” (2) represent a class
of devices which imitate the axonal discharge in a gross sort of way,
without all the subtle nuances of the Hodgkin-Huxley model. Crane has
shown that neuristors can be combined to yield the various Boolean
functions needed in a computer.

However, interesting as such models of the axon are, there is some
question as to their importance in the development of self-organizing
systems. The pulse generation, “all-or-nothing” part of the axon
behavior could just as well be simulated by a “one-shot” trigger
circuit. The transmission characteristic of the axon is, after all,
only Nature’s way of sending a signal from here to there. It is
an admirable solution to the problem, when one considers that it
evolved, and still works, in a bath of salt water. There seems little
point, however, in a hardware designer limiting himself in this way,
especially if he has an adequate supply of insulated copper wire.

If the transmission characteristic of the axon is deleted, the
properties of the neuron which seem to be the most important in the
synthesis of self-organizing systems are:

    a. The neuron responds to a stimulus with an electrical
       pulse of standard size and shape. If the stimulus
       continues, the pulses occur at regular intervals
       with the rate of occurrence dependent on the
       intensity of stimulation.

    b. There is a threshold of stimulation. If the
       intensity of the stimulus is below this threshold,
       the neuron does not fire.

    c. The neuron is capable of temporal and spatial
       integration. Many subthreshold stimuli arriving at
       the neuron from different sources, or at slightly
       different times, can add up to a sufficient level to
       fire the neuron.

    d. Some inputs are excitatory, some are inhibitory.

    e. There is a refractory period. Once fired, there is
       a subsequent period during which the neuron cannot
       be fired again, no matter how large the stimulus.
       This places an upper limit on the pulse rate of any
       particular neuron.

    f. The neuron can learn. This property is conjectural
       in living neurons, since it appears that at
       the present time learning has not been clearly
       demonstrated in isolated living neurons.
       However, the learning property is basic to all
       self-organizing models.

Neuron models with the above characteristics have been built, although
none seem to have incorporated _all_ of them in a single model. Harman
(3) at Bell Labs has built neuron models which have the characteristics
(a) through (e), with which he has built extremely interesting devices
which simulate portions of the peripheral neuron system.

Various attempts at learning elements have been made, perhaps best
exemplified by those of Widrow (4). These devices are capable of
“learning,” but are static, and lack all the temporal characteristics
listed in (a) through (e). Such devices can be used to deal with
temporal patterns only by a mapping technique, in which a temporal
pattern is converted to a spatial one.

Having listed which seem to be the important properties of a neuron, it
is possible to synthesize a simple model which has all of them.

A number of input stimuli are fed to the neuron through a resistive
summing network which establishes the threshold and accomplishes
spatial integration. The voltage at the summing junction triggers a
“one-shot” circuit, which, by its very nature, accomplishes pulse
generation and exhibits temporal integration and a refractory period.
The polarity of an individual input determines whether it shall be
excitatory or inhibitory. This much of the circuitry is very similar to
Harmon’s model.

Learning is postulated to take place in the following way: when the
neuron fires, an outside influence (the environment, or a “trainer”)
determines whether or not the result of firing was desirable or not.
If it was desirable, the threshold of the neuron is lowered, making
it easier to fire the next time. If the result was not desirable, the
threshold is raised, making it more difficult for the neuron to fire
the next time.

In a self-organizing system, many model neurons would be
interconnected. A “punish-reward” (P-R) signal would be connected to
all neurons in common. However, means would be provided for only those
which have recently fired to be susceptible to the effects of the P-R
signal. Therefore, only those which had taken part in a recent response
are modified. This idea is due to Stewart (5), who applies it to his
electrochemical devices instead of to an electronic device.

The mechanization of the circuitry is rather straight-forward. A
portion of the output of the pulse generator is routed through a
“pulse-stretcher” or short-term memory which temporarily records the
fact that the neuron has recently fired. The pulse-stretcher output
controls a gate, which either accepts or rejects the P-R signal. The
P-R signal can take on only three values, a positive level, zero, or
a negative level, depending on whether the signal is “punish,” “no
action,” or “reward.” Finally, the gate output controls a variable
resistor, which is part of the resistive summing network. Figure 1 is a
block diagram of the complete model.

Note that this device differs from the usual “Perceptron” configuration
in that the threshold resistor is the only variable element, instead
of having each input resistor a variable weighting element. This
simplification could lead to a situation where, to prepare a specified
task, more single-variable neurons would be required than would
multivariable ones. This possible disadvantage is partially, at least,
offset by the very simple control algorithm which is contained in the
design of the model, and is not the matter of great concern which it
seems to be for most multivariable models.

[Illustration: Figure 1—Block diagram of neuron model]

Hand simulations of the action of this type of model suggest that a
certain amount of randomness would be desirable. It appears that a
self-organizing system built of these elements, and of sufficient
complexity to be interesting, would have a fair number of recirculating
loops, so that spontaneous activity would be maintained in the absence
of input stimulus. If this is the case, then randomness could easily
be introduced by adding a small amount of noise from a random noise
generator to the signal on the P-R bus. Thus, any neurons which
spontaneously fire would be continually having their thresholds
modified.

The mechanization of the model is not particularly complex, and can
be estimated as follows: The one-shot pulse generator would require
two transistors, the pulse stretcher one more. The bi-directional gate
would require a transistor and at least two diodes.

Several candidates for the electrically-controllable variable
resistor are available (6). Particularly good candidates appear to
be the “Memistor” or plating cell developed by Widrow (7), the solid
state version of it by Vendelin (8), and the “solion” (9). All are
electrochemical devices in which the resistance between two terminals
is controlled by the net charge flow through a third terminal. All are
adaptable to this particular circuit.

Of the three, however, the solion appears at first glance to have the
most promise in that its resistance is of the order of a few thousand
ohms (rather than the few ohms of the plating cells) which is more
compatible with ordinary solid-state circuitry. Solions have the
disadvantage that they can stand only very low voltages (less than 1
volt) and in their present form require extra bias potentials. If these
difficulties can be overcome, they offer considerable promise.

In summary, it appears that a rather simple neuron model can be built
which can mimic most of the important functions of real neurons. A
system built of these could be punished or rewarded by an observer,
so that it could be trained to give specified responses to specified
stimuli. In some cases, the observer could be simply the environment,
so that the system would learn directly from experience, and would be
therefore a self-organizing system.


REFERENCES

    1. Hodgkin, A. L., and Huxley, A. L.,
       “A Quantitative Description of Membrane Current and its
        Application to Conduction and Excitation in Nerve,”
       _J. Physiol._ =117=:500-544 (August 1952)

    2. Crane, H. D.,
       “Neuristor—A Novel Device and System Concept,”
      _Proc. IRE_ =50=:2048-2060 (Oct. 1962)

    3. Harmon, L. D., Levinson, J., and Van Bergeijk, W. A.,
       “Analog Models of Neural Mechanism,”
       _IRE Trans. on Information Theory_ =IT-8=:107-112
       (Feb. 1962)

    4. Widrow, B., and Hoff, M. E.,
       “Adaptive Switching Circuits,”
        Stanford Electronics Lab Tech Report 1553-1, June 1960

    5. Stewart, R. M.,
       “Electrochemical Wave Interactions and Extensive Field Effects
        in Excitable Cellular Structures,”
       First Pasadena Invitational Symposium on Self-Organizing Systems,
       Calif. Institute of Technology, Pasadena, Calif., 14 Nov. 1963

    6. Nagy, G.,
       “A Survey of Analog Memory Devices,”
       _IEEE Trans. on Electronic Cmptrs._ EC-12:388-393 (Aug. 1963)

    7. Widrow, B.,
       “An Adaptive Adaline Neuron Using Chemical Memistors,”
        Stanford Electronics Lab Tech Report 1553-2, Oct. 1960

    8. Vendelin, G. D.,
       “A Solid State Adaptive Component,”
       Stanford Electronics Lab Tech Report 1853-1, Jan. 1963

    9. “Solion Principles of Electrochemistry and Low-Power
        Electrochemical Devices,”
        Dept. of Comm., Office of Tech. Serv. =PB= 131931
        (U. S. Naval Ord. Lab., Silver Spring, Md., Aug. 1958)




Selection of Parameters for Neural Net Simulations[22]


         R. K. OVERTON

    _Autonetics Research Center_
       _Anaheim, California_

Research of high quality has been presented at this Symposium. Of
particular interest to me were the reports of the Aeronutronic group
and the Librascope group. The Aeronutronic group was commendably
systematic in its investigations of different arrangements of linear
threshold elements, and the Librascope data, presenting the effects of
attaching different values to the parameters of simulated neurons, are
both systematic and interesting.

Unfortunately, however, interest in such research can obscure a more
fundamental question which seems to merit study. That question concerns
the parameters, or attributes, which describe the simulated neuron.
Specifically, which parameters or attributes should be selected for
simulation? (For example, should a period of supernormal sensitivity be
simulated following an absolutely refractory period?)

Some selection obviously has to be made. Librascope, which is
trying to simulate neurons more or less faithfully, plans to build
a net of ten simulated neurons. In contrast, General Dynamics/Fort
Worth, with roughly the same degree of effort, is working with 3900
unfaithfully-simulated neurons. This comparison is not a criticism
of either group; the Librascope team has simply selected many more
parameters for simulation than has the General Dynamics group. Each
can make the selections it prefers, because the parameters of real
neurons which are necessary and sufficient for learning have not been
exhaustively identified.

From the point of view of one whose interests include real neurons,
this lack of identification is unfortunate. I once wrote a book which
included some guesses about the essential attributes of neurons. Since
that time, many neuron simulation programs have been written. But these
programs, although interesting and worthwhile in their own right, have
done little to answer the question of the necessary parameters. That
is, they do not make much better guesses possible. And yet better
guesses would also make for more “intelligent” machines.

[22] This paper, submitted after the Symposium, represents a more
detailed presentation of some of the issues raised in the discussion
sessions at the Symposium and hence, constitutes a worthwhile addition
to the Proceedings.




INDEX OF INVITED PARTICIPANTS


    MICHAEL ARBIB               Massachusetts Institute of Technology
    ROBERT H. ASENDORF          Hughes Research Laboratories/ Malibu
    J. A. DALY                  Astropower/Newport Beach
    GEORGE DeFLORIO             System Development Corp./Santa Monica
    DEREK H. FENDER             California Institute of Technology
    LEONARD FRIEDMAN            Space Technology Labs./Redondo Beach
    JAMES EMMETT GARVEY         ONR/Pasadena
    THOMAS L. GRETTENBERG       California Institute of Technology
    HAROLD HAMILTON             Librascope/Glendale
    JOSEPH HAWKINS              Aeronutronic/Newport Beach
    CHARLES HENDRIX             Space-General Corp./El Monte
    R. D. JOSEPH                Astropower/Newport Beach
    PETER A. KLEYN              Nortronics/Anaheim
    JOHN KUHN                   Space-General Corp./El Monte
    FRANK LEHAN                 Space-General Corp./El Monte
    EDWIN LEWIS                 Librascope/Glendale
    PETER C. LOCKEMANN          California Institute of Technology
    GILBERT D. McCANN           California Institute of Technology
    C. J. MUNCIE                Aeronutronic/Newport Beach
    C. OVERMIER                 Nortronics/Anaheim
    RICHARD K. OVERTON          Autonetics/Anaheim
    DIANE RAMSEY                Astropower/Newport Beach
    RICHARD REISS               Librascope/Glendale
    R. I. ŚCIBOR-MARCHOCKI      Nortronics/Anaheim
    JAMES J. SPILKER            Philco/Palo Alto
    ROBERT M. STEWART           Space-General Corp./El Monte
    HENNIG STIEVE               California Institute of Technology
    RICHARD TEW                 Space-General Corp./El Monte
    JOHN THORSEN                University of California/Los Angeles
    RICHARD VINETZ              Librascope/Glendale
    CHRISTOPH von CAMPENHAUSEN  California Institute of Technology
    DAVID VOWLES                California Institute of Technology
    HORST WOLF                  Astropower/Newport Beach

        U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE: 1966 O—205-502

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SELF-ORGANIZING SYSTEMS, 1963 ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland

by Lewis Carroll

THE MILLENNIUM FULCRUM EDITION 3.0

Contents

 CHAPTER I.     Down the Rabbit-Hole
 CHAPTER II.    The Pool of Tears
 CHAPTER III.   A Caucus-Race and a Long Tale
 CHAPTER IV.    The Rabbit Sends in a Little Bill
 CHAPTER V.     Advice from a Caterpillar
 CHAPTER VI.    Pig and Pepper
 CHAPTER VII.   A Mad Tea-Party
 CHAPTER VIII.  The Queen’s Croquet-Ground
 CHAPTER IX.    The Mock Turtle’s Story
 CHAPTER X.     The Lobster Quadrille
 CHAPTER XI.    Who Stole the Tarts?
 CHAPTER XII.   Alice’s Evidence




CHAPTER I.
Down the Rabbit-Hole


Alice was beginning to get very tired of sitting by her sister on the
bank, and of having nothing to do: once or twice she had peeped into
the book her sister was reading, but it had no pictures or
conversations in it, “and what is the use of a book,” thought Alice
“without pictures or conversations?”

So she was considering in her own mind (as well as she could, for the
hot day made her feel very sleepy and stupid), whether the pleasure of
making a daisy-chain would be worth the trouble of getting up and
picking the daisies, when suddenly a White Rabbit with pink eyes ran
close by her.

There was nothing so _very_ remarkable in that; nor did Alice think it
so _very_ much out of the way to hear the Rabbit say to itself, “Oh
dear! Oh dear! I shall be late!” (when she thought it over afterwards,
it occurred to her that she ought to have wondered at this, but at the
time it all seemed quite natural); but when the Rabbit actually _took a
watch out of its waistcoat-pocket_, and looked at it, and then hurried
on, Alice started to her feet, for it flashed across her mind that she
had never before seen a rabbit with either a waistcoat-pocket, or a
watch to take out of it, and burning with curiosity, she ran across the
field after it, and fortunately was just in time to see it pop down a
large rabbit-hole under the hedge.

In another moment down went Alice after it, never once considering how
in the world she was to get out again.

The rabbit-hole went straight on like a tunnel for some way, and then
dipped suddenly down, so suddenly that Alice had not a moment to think
about stopping herself before she found herself falling down a very
deep well.

Either the well was very deep, or she fell very slowly, for she had
plenty of time as she went down to look about her and to wonder what
was going to happen next. First, she tried to look down and make out
what she was coming to, but it was too dark to see anything; then she
looked at the sides of the well, and noticed that they were filled with
cupboards and book-shelves; here and there she saw maps and pictures
hung upon pegs. She took down a jar from one of the shelves as she
passed; it was labelled “ORANGE MARMALADE”, but to her great
disappointment it was empty: she did not like to drop the jar for fear
of killing somebody underneath, so managed to put it into one of the
cupboards as she fell past it.

“Well!” thought Alice to herself, “after such a fall as this, I shall
think nothing of tumbling down stairs! How brave they’ll all think me
at home! Why, I wouldn’t say anything about it, even if I fell off the
top of the house!” (Which was very likely true.)

Down, down, down. Would the fall _never_ come to an end? “I wonder how
many miles I’ve fallen by this time?” she said aloud. “I must be
getting somewhere near the centre of the earth. Let me see: that would
be four thousand miles down, I think—” (for, you see, Alice had learnt
several things of this sort in her lessons in the schoolroom, and
though this was not a _very_ good opportunity for showing off her
knowledge, as there was no one to listen to her, still it was good
practice to say it over) “—yes, that’s about the right distance—but
then I wonder what Latitude or Longitude I’ve got to?” (Alice had no
idea what Latitude was, or Longitude either, but thought they were nice
grand words to say.)

Presently she began again. “I wonder if I shall fall right _through_
the earth! How funny it’ll seem to come out among the people that walk
with their heads downward! The Antipathies, I think—” (she was rather
glad there _was_ no one listening, this time, as it didn’t sound at all
the right word) “—but I shall have to ask them what the name of the
country is, you know. Please, Ma’am, is this New Zealand or Australia?”
(and she tried to curtsey as she spoke—fancy _curtseying_ as you’re
falling through the air! Do you think you could manage it?) “And what
an ignorant little girl she’ll think me for asking! No, it’ll never do
to ask: perhaps I shall see it written up somewhere.”

Down, down, down. There was nothing else to do, so Alice soon began
talking again. “Dinah’ll miss me very much to-night, I should think!”
(Dinah was the cat.) “I hope they’ll remember her saucer of milk at
tea-time. Dinah my dear! I wish you were down here with me! There are
no mice in the air, I’m afraid, but you might catch a bat, and that’s
very like a mouse, you know. But do cats eat bats, I wonder?” And here
Alice began to get rather sleepy, and went on saying to herself, in a
dreamy sort of way, “Do cats eat bats? Do cats eat bats?” and
sometimes, “Do bats eat cats?” for, you see, as she couldn’t answer
either question, it didn’t much matter which way she put it. She felt
that she was dozing off, and had just begun to dream that she was
walking hand in hand with Dinah, and saying to her very earnestly,
“Now, Dinah, tell me the truth: did you ever eat a bat?” when suddenly,
thump! thump! down she came upon a heap of sticks and dry leaves, and
the fall was over.

Alice was not a bit hurt, and she jumped up on to her feet in a moment:
she looked up, but it was all dark overhead; before her was another
long passage, and the White Rabbit was still in sight, hurrying down
it. There was not a moment to be lost: away went Alice like the wind,
and was just in time to hear it say, as it turned a corner, “Oh my ears
and whiskers, how late it’s getting!” She was close behind it when she
turned the corner, but the Rabbit was no longer to be seen: she found
herself in a long, low hall, which was lit up by a row of lamps hanging
from the roof.

There were doors all round the hall, but they were all locked; and when
Alice had been all the way down one side and up the other, trying every
door, she walked sadly down the middle, wondering how she was ever to
get out again.

Suddenly she came upon a little three-legged table, all made of solid
glass; there was nothing on it except a tiny golden key, and Alice’s
first thought was that it might belong to one of the doors of the hall;
but, alas! either the locks were too large, or the key was too small,
but at any rate it would not open any of them. However, on the second
time round, she came upon a low curtain she had not noticed before, and
behind it was a little door about fifteen inches high: she tried the
little golden key in the lock, and to her great delight it fitted!

Alice opened the door and found that it led into a small passage, not
much larger than a rat-hole: she knelt down and looked along the
passage into the loveliest garden you ever saw. How she longed to get
out of that dark hall, and wander about among those beds of bright
flowers and those cool fountains, but she could not even get her head
through the doorway; “and even if my head would go through,” thought
poor Alice, “it would be of very little use without my shoulders. Oh,
how I wish I could shut up like a telescope! I think I could, if I only
knew how to begin.” For, you see, so many out-of-the-way things had
happened lately, that Alice had begun to think that very few things
indeed were really impossible.

There seemed to be no use in waiting by the little door, so she went
back to the table, half hoping she might find another key on it, or at
any rate a book of rules for shutting people up like telescopes: this
time she found a little bottle on it, (“which certainly was not here
before,” said Alice,) and round the neck of the bottle was a paper
label, with the words “DRINK ME,” beautifully printed on it in large
letters.

It was all very well to say “Drink me,” but the wise little Alice was
not going to do _that_ in a hurry. “No, I’ll look first,” she said,
“and see whether it’s marked ‘_poison_’ or not”; for she had read
several nice little histories about children who had got burnt, and
eaten up by wild beasts and other unpleasant things, all because they
_would_ not remember the simple rules their friends had taught them:
such as, that a red-hot poker will burn you if you hold it too long;
and that if you cut your finger _very_ deeply with a knife, it usually
bleeds; and she had never forgotten that, if you drink much from a
bottle marked “poison,” it is almost certain to disagree with you,
sooner or later.

However, this bottle was _not_ marked “poison,” so Alice ventured to
taste it, and finding it very nice, (it had, in fact, a sort of mixed
flavour of cherry-tart, custard, pine-apple, roast turkey, toffee, and
hot buttered toast,) she very soon finished it off.

*      *      *      *      *      *      *

    *      *      *      *      *      *

*      *      *      *      *      *      *


“What a curious feeling!” said Alice; “I must be shutting up like a
telescope.”

And so it was indeed: she was now only ten inches high, and her face
brightened up at the thought that she was now the right size for going
through the little door into that lovely garden. First, however, she
waited for a few minutes to see if she was going to shrink any further:
she felt a little nervous about this; “for it might end, you know,”
said Alice to herself, “in my going out altogether, like a candle. I
wonder what I should be like then?” And she tried to fancy what the
flame of a candle is like after the candle is blown out, for she could
not remember ever having seen such a thing.

After a while, finding that nothing more happened, she decided on going
into the garden at once; but, alas for poor Alice! when she got to the
door, she found she had forgotten the little golden key, and when she
went back to the table for it, she found she could not possibly reach
it: she could see it quite plainly through the glass, and she tried her
best to climb up one of the legs of the table, but it was too slippery;
and when she had tired herself out with trying, the poor little thing
sat down and cried.

“Come, there’s no use in crying like that!” said Alice to herself,
rather sharply; “I advise you to leave off this minute!” She generally
gave herself very good advice, (though she very seldom followed it),
and sometimes she scolded herself so severely as to bring tears into
her eyes; and once she remembered trying to box her own ears for having
cheated herself in a game of croquet she was playing against herself,
for this curious child was very fond of pretending to be two people.
“But it’s no use now,” thought poor Alice, “to pretend to be two
people! Why, there’s hardly enough of me left to make _one_ respectable
person!”

Soon her eye fell on a little glass box that was lying under the table:
she opened it, and found in it a very small cake, on which the words
“EAT ME” were beautifully marked in currants. “Well, I’ll eat it,” said
Alice, “and if it makes me grow larger, I can reach the key; and if it
makes me grow smaller, I can creep under the door; so either way I’ll
get into the garden, and I don’t care which happens!”

She ate a little bit, and said anxiously to herself, “Which way? Which
way?”, holding her hand on the top of her head to feel which way it was
growing, and she was quite surprised to find that she remained the same
size: to be sure, this generally happens when one eats cake, but Alice
had got so much into the way of expecting nothing but out-of-the-way
things to happen, that it seemed quite dull and stupid for life to go
on in the common way.

So she set to work, and very soon finished off the cake.

*      *      *      *      *      *      *

    *      *      *      *      *      *

*      *      *      *      *      *      *




CHAPTER II.
The Pool of Tears


“Curiouser and curiouser!” cried Alice (she was so much surprised, that
for the moment she quite forgot how to speak good English); “now I’m
opening out like the largest telescope that ever was! Good-bye, feet!”
(for when she looked down at her feet, they seemed to be almost out of
sight, they were getting so far off). “Oh, my poor little feet, I
wonder who will put on your shoes and stockings for you now, dears? I’m
sure _I_ shan’t be able! I shall be a great deal too far off to trouble
myself about you: you must manage the best way you can;—but I must be
kind to them,” thought Alice, “or perhaps they won’t walk the way I
want to go! Let me see: I’ll give them a new pair of boots every
Christmas.”

And she went on planning to herself how she would manage it. “They must
go by the carrier,” she thought; “and how funny it’ll seem, sending
presents to one’s own feet! And how odd the directions will look!

     _Alice’s Right Foot, Esq., Hearthrug, near the Fender,_ (_with
     Alice’s love_).

Oh dear, what nonsense I’m talking!”

Just then her head struck against the roof of the hall: in fact she was
now more than nine feet high, and she at once took up the little golden
key and hurried off to the garden door.

Poor Alice! It was as much as she could do, lying down on one side, to
look through into the garden with one eye; but to get through was more
hopeless than ever: she sat down and began to cry again.

“You ought to be ashamed of yourself,” said Alice, “a great girl like
you,” (she might well say this), “to go on crying in this way! Stop
this moment, I tell you!” But she went on all the same, shedding
gallons of tears, until there was a large pool all round her, about
four inches deep and reaching half down the hall.

After a time she heard a little pattering of feet in the distance, and
she hastily dried her eyes to see what was coming. It was the White
Rabbit returning, splendidly dressed, with a pair of white kid gloves
in one hand and a large fan in the other: he came trotting along in a
great hurry, muttering to himself as he came, “Oh! the Duchess, the
Duchess! Oh! won’t she be savage if I’ve kept her waiting!” Alice felt
so desperate that she was ready to ask help of any one; so, when the
Rabbit came near her, she began, in a low, timid voice, “If you please,
sir—” The Rabbit started violently, dropped the white kid gloves and
the fan, and skurried away into the darkness as hard as he could go.

Alice took up the fan and gloves, and, as the hall was very hot, she
kept fanning herself all the time she went on talking: “Dear, dear! How
queer everything is to-day! And yesterday things went on just as usual.
I wonder if I’ve been changed in the night? Let me think: was I the
same when I got up this morning? I almost think I can remember feeling
a little different. But if I’m not the same, the next question is, Who
in the world am I? Ah, _that’s_ the great puzzle!” And she began
thinking over all the children she knew that were of the same age as
herself, to see if she could have been changed for any of them.

“I’m sure I’m not Ada,” she said, “for her hair goes in such long
ringlets, and mine doesn’t go in ringlets at all; and I’m sure I can’t
be Mabel, for I know all sorts of things, and she, oh! she knows such a
very little! Besides, _she’s_ she, and _I’m_ I, and—oh dear, how
puzzling it all is! I’ll try if I know all the things I used to know.
Let me see: four times five is twelve, and four times six is thirteen,
and four times seven is—oh dear! I shall never get to twenty at that
rate! However, the Multiplication Table doesn’t signify: let’s try
Geography. London is the capital of Paris, and Paris is the capital of
Rome, and Rome—no, _that’s_ all wrong, I’m certain! I must have been
changed for Mabel! I’ll try and say ‘_How doth the little_—’” and she
crossed her hands on her lap as if she were saying lessons, and began
to repeat it, but her voice sounded hoarse and strange, and the words
did not come the same as they used to do:—

“How doth the little crocodile
    Improve his shining tail,
And pour the waters of the Nile
    On every golden scale!

“How cheerfully he seems to grin,
    How neatly spread his claws,
And welcome little fishes in
    With gently smiling jaws!”


“I’m sure those are not the right words,” said poor Alice, and her eyes
filled with tears again as she went on, “I must be Mabel after all, and
I shall have to go and live in that poky little house, and have next to
no toys to play with, and oh! ever so many lessons to learn! No, I’ve
made up my mind about it; if I’m Mabel, I’ll stay down here! It’ll be
no use their putting their heads down and saying ‘Come up again, dear!’
I shall only look up and say ‘Who am I then? Tell me that first, and
then, if I like being that person, I’ll come up: if not, I’ll stay down
here till I’m somebody else’—but, oh dear!” cried Alice, with a sudden
burst of tears, “I do wish they _would_ put their heads down! I am so
_very_ tired of being all alone here!”

As she said this she looked down at her hands, and was surprised to see
that she had put on one of the Rabbit’s little white kid gloves while
she was talking. “How _can_ I have done that?” she thought. “I must be
growing small again.” She got up and went to the table to measure
herself by it, and found that, as nearly as she could guess, she was
now about two feet high, and was going on shrinking rapidly: she soon
found out that the cause of this was the fan she was holding, and she
dropped it hastily, just in time to avoid shrinking away altogether.

“That _was_ a narrow escape!” said Alice, a good deal frightened at the
sudden change, but very glad to find herself still in existence; “and
now for the garden!” and she ran with all speed back to the little
door: but, alas! the little door was shut again, and the little golden
key was lying on the glass table as before, “and things are worse than
ever,” thought the poor child, “for I never was so small as this
before, never! And I declare it’s too bad, that it is!”

As she said these words her foot slipped, and in another moment,
splash! she was up to her chin in salt water. Her first idea was that
she had somehow fallen into the sea, “and in that case I can go back by
railway,” she said to herself. (Alice had been to the seaside once in
her life, and had come to the general conclusion, that wherever you go
to on the English coast you find a number of bathing machines in the
sea, some children digging in the sand with wooden spades, then a row
of lodging houses, and behind them a railway station.) However, she
soon made out that she was in the pool of tears which she had wept when
she was nine feet high.

“I wish I hadn’t cried so much!” said Alice, as she swam about, trying
to find her way out. “I shall be punished for it now, I suppose, by
being drowned in my own tears! That _will_ be a queer thing, to be
sure! However, everything is queer to-day.”

Just then she heard something splashing about in the pool a little way
off, and she swam nearer to make out what it was: at first she thought
it must be a walrus or hippopotamus, but then she remembered how small
she was now, and she soon made out that it was only a mouse that had
slipped in like herself.

“Would it be of any use, now,” thought Alice, “to speak to this mouse?
Everything is so out-of-the-way down here, that I should think very
likely it can talk: at any rate, there’s no harm in trying.” So she
began: “O Mouse, do you know the way out of this pool? I am very tired
of swimming about here, O Mouse!” (Alice thought this must be the right
way of speaking to a mouse: she had never done such a thing before, but
she remembered having seen in her brother’s Latin Grammar, “A mouse—of
a mouse—to a mouse—a mouse—O mouse!”) The Mouse looked at her rather
inquisitively, and seemed to her to wink with one of its little eyes,
but it said nothing.

“Perhaps it doesn’t understand English,” thought Alice; “I daresay it’s
a French mouse, come over with William the Conqueror.” (For, with all
her knowledge of history, Alice had no very clear notion how long ago
anything had happened.) So she began again: “Où est ma chatte?” which
was the first sentence in her French lesson-book. The Mouse gave a
sudden leap out of the water, and seemed to quiver all over with
fright. “Oh, I beg your pardon!” cried Alice hastily, afraid that she
had hurt the poor animal’s feelings. “I quite forgot you didn’t like
cats.”

“Not like cats!” cried the Mouse, in a shrill, passionate voice. “Would
_you_ like cats if you were me?”

“Well, perhaps not,” said Alice in a soothing tone: “don’t be angry
about it. And yet I wish I could show you our cat Dinah: I think you’d
take a fancy to cats if you could only see her. She is such a dear
quiet thing,” Alice went on, half to herself, as she swam lazily about
in the pool, “and she sits purring so nicely by the fire, licking her
paws and washing her face—and she is such a nice soft thing to
nurse—and she’s such a capital one for catching mice—oh, I beg your
pardon!” cried Alice again, for this time the Mouse was bristling all
over, and she felt certain it must be really offended. “We won’t talk
about her any more if you’d rather not.”

“We indeed!” cried the Mouse, who was trembling down to the end of his
tail. “As if _I_ would talk on such a subject! Our family always
_hated_ cats: nasty, low, vulgar things! Don’t let me hear the name
again!”

“I won’t indeed!” said Alice, in a great hurry to change the subject of
conversation. “Are you—are you fond—of—of dogs?” The Mouse did not
answer, so Alice went on eagerly: “There is such a nice little dog near
our house I should like to show you! A little bright-eyed terrier, you
know, with oh, such long curly brown hair! And it’ll fetch things when
you throw them, and it’ll sit up and beg for its dinner, and all sorts
of things—I can’t remember half of them—and it belongs to a farmer, you
know, and he says it’s so useful, it’s worth a hundred pounds! He says
it kills all the rats and—oh dear!” cried Alice in a sorrowful tone,
“I’m afraid I’ve offended it again!” For the Mouse was swimming away
from her as hard as it could go, and making quite a commotion in the
pool as it went.

So she called softly after it, “Mouse dear! Do come back again, and we
won’t talk about cats or dogs either, if you don’t like them!” When the
Mouse heard this, it turned round and swam slowly back to her: its face
was quite pale (with passion, Alice thought), and it said in a low
trembling voice, “Let us get to the shore, and then I’ll tell you my
history, and you’ll understand why it is I hate cats and dogs.”

It was high time to go, for the pool was getting quite crowded with the
birds and animals that had fallen into it: there were a Duck and a
Dodo, a Lory and an Eaglet, and several other curious creatures. Alice
led the way, and the whole party swam to the shore.




CHAPTER III.
A Caucus-Race and a Long Tale


They were indeed a queer-looking party that assembled on the bank—the
birds with draggled feathers, the animals with their fur clinging close
to them, and all dripping wet, cross, and uncomfortable.

The first question of course was, how to get dry again: they had a
consultation about this, and after a few minutes it seemed quite
natural to Alice to find herself talking familiarly with them, as if
she had known them all her life. Indeed, she had quite a long argument
with the Lory, who at last turned sulky, and would only say, “I am
older than you, and must know better;” and this Alice would not allow
without knowing how old it was, and, as the Lory positively refused to
tell its age, there was no more to be said.

At last the Mouse, who seemed to be a person of authority among them,
called out, “Sit down, all of you, and listen to me! _I’ll_ soon make
you dry enough!” They all sat down at once, in a large ring, with the
Mouse in the middle. Alice kept her eyes anxiously fixed on it, for she
felt sure she would catch a bad cold if she did not get dry very soon.

“Ahem!” said the Mouse with an important air, “are you all ready? This
is the driest thing I know. Silence all round, if you please! ‘William
the Conqueror, whose cause was favoured by the pope, was soon submitted
to by the English, who wanted leaders, and had been of late much
accustomed to usurpation and conquest. Edwin and Morcar, the earls of
Mercia and Northumbria—’”

“Ugh!” said the Lory, with a shiver.

“I beg your pardon!” said the Mouse, frowning, but very politely: “Did
you speak?”

“Not I!” said the Lory hastily.

“I thought you did,” said the Mouse. “—I proceed. ‘Edwin and Morcar,
the earls of Mercia and Northumbria, declared for him: and even
Stigand, the patriotic archbishop of Canterbury, found it advisable—’”

“Found _what_?” said the Duck.

“Found _it_,” the Mouse replied rather crossly: “of course you know
what ‘it’ means.”

“I know what ‘it’ means well enough, when _I_ find a thing,” said the
Duck: “it’s generally a frog or a worm. The question is, what did the
archbishop find?”

The Mouse did not notice this question, but hurriedly went on, “‘—found
it advisable to go with Edgar Atheling to meet William and offer him
the crown. William’s conduct at first was moderate. But the insolence
of his Normans—’ How are you getting on now, my dear?” it continued,
turning to Alice as it spoke.

“As wet as ever,” said Alice in a melancholy tone: “it doesn’t seem to
dry me at all.”

“In that case,” said the Dodo solemnly, rising to its feet, “I move
that the meeting adjourn, for the immediate adoption of more energetic
remedies—”

“Speak English!” said the Eaglet. “I don’t know the meaning of half
those long words, and, what’s more, I don’t believe you do either!” And
the Eaglet bent down its head to hide a smile: some of the other birds
tittered audibly.

“What I was going to say,” said the Dodo in an offended tone, “was,
that the best thing to get us dry would be a Caucus-race.”

“What _is_ a Caucus-race?” said Alice; not that she wanted much to
know, but the Dodo had paused as if it thought that _somebody_ ought to
speak, and no one else seemed inclined to say anything.

“Why,” said the Dodo, “the best way to explain it is to do it.” (And,
as you might like to try the thing yourself, some winter day, I will
tell you how the Dodo managed it.)

First it marked out a race-course, in a sort of circle, (“the exact
shape doesn’t matter,” it said,) and then all the party were placed
along the course, here and there. There was no “One, two, three, and
away,” but they began running when they liked, and left off when they
liked, so that it was not easy to know when the race was over. However,
when they had been running half an hour or so, and were quite dry
again, the Dodo suddenly called out “The race is over!” and they all
crowded round it, panting, and asking, “But who has won?”

This question the Dodo could not answer without a great deal of
thought, and it sat for a long time with one finger pressed upon its
forehead (the position in which you usually see Shakespeare, in the
pictures of him), while the rest waited in silence. At last the Dodo
said, “_Everybody_ has won, and all must have prizes.”

“But who is to give the prizes?” quite a chorus of voices asked.

“Why, _she_, of course,” said the Dodo, pointing to Alice with one
finger; and the whole party at once crowded round her, calling out in a
confused way, “Prizes! Prizes!”

Alice had no idea what to do, and in despair she put her hand in her
pocket, and pulled out a box of comfits, (luckily the salt water had
not got into it), and handed them round as prizes. There was exactly
one a-piece, all round.

“But she must have a prize herself, you know,” said the Mouse.

“Of course,” the Dodo replied very gravely. “What else have you got in
your pocket?” he went on, turning to Alice.

“Only a thimble,” said Alice sadly.

“Hand it over here,” said the Dodo.

Then they all crowded round her once more, while the Dodo solemnly
presented the thimble, saying “We beg your acceptance of this elegant
thimble;” and, when it had finished this short speech, they all
cheered.

Alice thought the whole thing very absurd, but they all looked so grave
that she did not dare to laugh; and, as she could not think of anything
to say, she simply bowed, and took the thimble, looking as solemn as
she could.

The next thing was to eat the comfits: this caused some noise and
confusion, as the large birds complained that they could not taste
theirs, and the small ones choked and had to be patted on the back.
However, it was over at last, and they sat down again in a ring, and
begged the Mouse to tell them something more.

“You promised to tell me your history, you know,” said Alice, “and why
it is you hate—C and D,” she added in a whisper, half afraid that it
would be offended again.

“Mine is a long and a sad tale!” said the Mouse, turning to Alice, and
sighing.

“It _is_ a long tail, certainly,” said Alice, looking down with wonder
at the Mouse’s tail; “but why do you call it sad?” And she kept on
puzzling about it while the Mouse was speaking, so that her idea of the
tale was something like this:—

         “Fury said to a mouse, That he met in the house, ‘Let us both
         go to law: _I_ will prosecute _you_.—Come, I’ll take no
         denial; We must have a trial: For really this morning I’ve
         nothing to do.’ Said the mouse to the cur, ‘Such a trial, dear
         sir, With no jury or judge, would be wasting our breath.’
         ‘I’ll be judge, I’ll be jury,’ Said cunning old Fury: ‘I’ll
         try the whole cause, and condemn you to death.’”

“You are not attending!” said the Mouse to Alice severely. “What are
you thinking of?”

“I beg your pardon,” said Alice very humbly: “you had got to the fifth
bend, I think?”

“I had _not!_” cried the Mouse, sharply and very angrily.

“A knot!” said Alice, always ready to make herself useful, and looking
anxiously about her. “Oh, do let me help to undo it!”

“I shall do nothing of the sort,” said the Mouse, getting up and
walking away. “You insult me by talking such nonsense!”

“I didn’t mean it!” pleaded poor Alice. “But you’re so easily offended,
you know!”

The Mouse only growled in reply.

“Please come back and finish your story!” Alice called after it; and
the others all joined in chorus, “Yes, please do!” but the Mouse only
shook its head impatiently, and walked a little quicker.

“What a pity it wouldn’t stay!” sighed the Lory, as soon as it was
quite out of sight; and an old Crab took the opportunity of saying to
her daughter “Ah, my dear! Let this be a lesson to you never to lose
_your_ temper!” “Hold your tongue, Ma!” said the young Crab, a little
snappishly. “You’re enough to try the patience of an oyster!”

“I wish I had our Dinah here, I know I do!” said Alice aloud,
addressing nobody in particular. “She’d soon fetch it back!”

“And who is Dinah, if I might venture to ask the question?” said the
Lory.

Alice replied eagerly, for she was always ready to talk about her pet:
“Dinah’s our cat. And she’s such a capital one for catching mice you
can’t think! And oh, I wish you could see her after the birds! Why,
she’ll eat a little bird as soon as look at it!”

This speech caused a remarkable sensation among the party. Some of the
birds hurried off at once: one old Magpie began wrapping itself up very
carefully, remarking, “I really must be getting home; the night-air
doesn’t suit my throat!” and a Canary called out in a trembling voice
to its children, “Come away, my dears! It’s high time you were all in
bed!” On various pretexts they all moved off, and Alice was soon left
alone.

“I wish I hadn’t mentioned Dinah!” she said to herself in a melancholy
tone. “Nobody seems to like her, down here, and I’m sure she’s the best
cat in the world! Oh, my dear Dinah! I wonder if I shall ever see you
any more!” And here poor Alice began to cry again, for she felt very
lonely and low-spirited. In a little while, however, she again heard a
little pattering of footsteps in the distance, and she looked up
eagerly, half hoping that the Mouse had changed his mind, and was
coming back to finish his story.




CHAPTER IV.
The Rabbit Sends in a Little Bill


It was the White Rabbit, trotting slowly back again, and looking
anxiously about as it went, as if it had lost something; and she heard
it muttering to itself “The Duchess! The Duchess! Oh my dear paws! Oh
my fur and whiskers! She’ll get me executed, as sure as ferrets are
ferrets! Where _can_ I have dropped them, I wonder?” Alice guessed in a
moment that it was looking for the fan and the pair of white kid
gloves, and she very good-naturedly began hunting about for them, but
they were nowhere to be seen—everything seemed to have changed since
her swim in the pool, and the great hall, with the glass table and the
little door, had vanished completely.

Very soon the Rabbit noticed Alice, as she went hunting about, and
called out to her in an angry tone, “Why, Mary Ann, what _are_ you
doing out here? Run home this moment, and fetch me a pair of gloves and
a fan! Quick, now!” And Alice was so much frightened that she ran off
at once in the direction it pointed to, without trying to explain the
mistake it had made.

“He took me for his housemaid,” she said to herself as she ran. “How
surprised he’ll be when he finds out who I am! But I’d better take him
his fan and gloves—that is, if I can find them.” As she said this, she
came upon a neat little house, on the door of which was a bright brass
plate with the name “W. RABBIT,” engraved upon it. She went in without
knocking, and hurried upstairs, in great fear lest she should meet the
real Mary Ann, and be turned out of the house before she had found the
fan and gloves.

“How queer it seems,” Alice said to herself, “to be going messages for
a rabbit! I suppose Dinah’ll be sending me on messages next!” And she
began fancying the sort of thing that would happen: “‘Miss Alice! Come
here directly, and get ready for your walk!’ ‘Coming in a minute,
nurse! But I’ve got to see that the mouse doesn’t get out.’ Only I
don’t think,” Alice went on, “that they’d let Dinah stop in the house
if it began ordering people about like that!”

By this time she had found her way into a tidy little room with a table
in the window, and on it (as she had hoped) a fan and two or three
pairs of tiny white kid gloves: she took up the fan and a pair of the
gloves, and was just going to leave the room, when her eye fell upon a
little bottle that stood near the looking-glass. There was no label
this time with the words “DRINK ME,” but nevertheless she uncorked it
and put it to her lips. “I know _something_ interesting is sure to
happen,” she said to herself, “whenever I eat or drink anything; so
I’ll just see what this bottle does. I do hope it’ll make me grow large
again, for really I’m quite tired of being such a tiny little thing!”

It did so indeed, and much sooner than she had expected: before she had
drunk half the bottle, she found her head pressing against the ceiling,
and had to stoop to save her neck from being broken. She hastily put
down the bottle, saying to herself “That’s quite enough—I hope I shan’t
grow any more—As it is, I can’t get out at the door—I do wish I hadn’t
drunk quite so much!”

Alas! it was too late to wish that! She went on growing, and growing,
and very soon had to kneel down on the floor: in another minute there
was not even room for this, and she tried the effect of lying down with
one elbow against the door, and the other arm curled round her head.
Still she went on growing, and, as a last resource, she put one arm out
of the window, and one foot up the chimney, and said to herself “Now I
can do no more, whatever happens. What _will_ become of me?”

Luckily for Alice, the little magic bottle had now had its full effect,
and she grew no larger: still it was very uncomfortable, and, as there
seemed to be no sort of chance of her ever getting out of the room
again, no wonder she felt unhappy.

“It was much pleasanter at home,” thought poor Alice, “when one wasn’t
always growing larger and smaller, and being ordered about by mice and
rabbits. I almost wish I hadn’t gone down that rabbit-hole—and yet—and
yet—it’s rather curious, you know, this sort of life! I do wonder what
_can_ have happened to me! When I used to read fairy-tales, I fancied
that kind of thing never happened, and now here I am in the middle of
one! There ought to be a book written about me, that there ought! And
when I grow up, I’ll write one—but I’m grown up now,” she added in a
sorrowful tone; “at least there’s no room to grow up any more _here_.”

“But then,” thought Alice, “shall I _never_ get any older than I am
now? That’ll be a comfort, one way—never to be an old woman—but
then—always to have lessons to learn! Oh, I shouldn’t like _that!_”

“Oh, you foolish Alice!” she answered herself. “How can you learn
lessons in here? Why, there’s hardly room for _you_, and no room at all
for any lesson-books!”

And so she went on, taking first one side and then the other, and
making quite a conversation of it altogether; but after a few minutes
she heard a voice outside, and stopped to listen.

“Mary Ann! Mary Ann!” said the voice. “Fetch me my gloves this moment!”
Then came a little pattering of feet on the stairs. Alice knew it was
the Rabbit coming to look for her, and she trembled till she shook the
house, quite forgetting that she was now about a thousand times as
large as the Rabbit, and had no reason to be afraid of it.

Presently the Rabbit came up to the door, and tried to open it; but, as
the door opened inwards, and Alice’s elbow was pressed hard against it,
that attempt proved a failure. Alice heard it say to itself “Then I’ll
go round and get in at the window.”

“_That_ you won’t!” thought Alice, and, after waiting till she fancied
she heard the Rabbit just under the window, she suddenly spread out her
hand, and made a snatch in the air. She did not get hold of anything,
but she heard a little shriek and a fall, and a crash of broken glass,
from which she concluded that it was just possible it had fallen into a
cucumber-frame, or something of the sort.

Next came an angry voice—the Rabbit’s—“Pat! Pat! Where are you?” And
then a voice she had never heard before, “Sure then I’m here! Digging
for apples, yer honour!”

“Digging for apples, indeed!” said the Rabbit angrily. “Here! Come and
help me out of _this!_” (Sounds of more broken glass.)

“Now tell me, Pat, what’s that in the window?”

“Sure, it’s an arm, yer honour!” (He pronounced it “arrum.”)

“An arm, you goose! Who ever saw one that size? Why, it fills the whole
window!”

“Sure, it does, yer honour: but it’s an arm for all that.”

“Well, it’s got no business there, at any rate: go and take it away!”

There was a long silence after this, and Alice could only hear whispers
now and then; such as, “Sure, I don’t like it, yer honour, at all, at
all!” “Do as I tell you, you coward!” and at last she spread out her
hand again, and made another snatch in the air. This time there were
_two_ little shrieks, and more sounds of broken glass. “What a number
of cucumber-frames there must be!” thought Alice. “I wonder what
they’ll do next! As for pulling me out of the window, I only wish they
_could!_ I’m sure _I_ don’t want to stay in here any longer!”

She waited for some time without hearing anything more: at last came a
rumbling of little cartwheels, and the sound of a good many voices all
talking together: she made out the words: “Where’s the other
ladder?—Why, I hadn’t to bring but one; Bill’s got the other—Bill!
fetch it here, lad!—Here, put ’em up at this corner—No, tie ’em
together first—they don’t reach half high enough yet—Oh! they’ll do
well enough; don’t be particular—Here, Bill! catch hold of this
rope—Will the roof bear?—Mind that loose slate—Oh, it’s coming down!
Heads below!” (a loud crash)—“Now, who did that?—It was Bill, I
fancy—Who’s to go down the chimney?—Nay, _I_ shan’t! _You_ do
it!—_That_ I won’t, then!—Bill’s to go down—Here, Bill! the master says
you’re to go down the chimney!”

“Oh! So Bill’s got to come down the chimney, has he?” said Alice to
herself. “Shy, they seem to put everything upon Bill! I wouldn’t be in
Bill’s place for a good deal: this fireplace is narrow, to be sure; but
I _think_ I can kick a little!”

She drew her foot as far down the chimney as she could, and waited till
she heard a little animal (she couldn’t guess of what sort it was)
scratching and scrambling about in the chimney close above her: then,
saying to herself “This is Bill,” she gave one sharp kick, and waited
to see what would happen next.

The first thing she heard was a general chorus of “There goes Bill!”
then the Rabbit’s voice along—“Catch him, you by the hedge!” then
silence, and then another confusion of voices—“Hold up his head—Brandy
now—Don’t choke him—How was it, old fellow? What happened to you? Tell
us all about it!”

Last came a little feeble, squeaking voice, (“That’s Bill,” thought
Alice,) “Well, I hardly know—No more, thank ye; I’m better now—but I’m
a deal too flustered to tell you—all I know is, something comes at me
like a Jack-in-the-box, and up I goes like a sky-rocket!”

“So you did, old fellow!” said the others.

“We must burn the house down!” said the Rabbit’s voice; and Alice
called out as loud as she could, “If you do, I’ll set Dinah at you!”

There was a dead silence instantly, and Alice thought to herself, “I
wonder what they _will_ do next! If they had any sense, they’d take the
roof off.” After a minute or two, they began moving about again, and
Alice heard the Rabbit say, “A barrowful will do, to begin with.”

“A barrowful of _what?_” thought Alice; but she had not long to doubt,
for the next moment a shower of little pebbles came rattling in at the
window, and some of them hit her in the face. “I’ll put a stop to
this,” she said to herself, and shouted out, “You’d better not do that
again!” which produced another dead silence.

Alice noticed with some surprise that the pebbles were all turning into
little cakes as they lay on the floor, and a bright idea came into her
head. “If I eat one of these cakes,” she thought, “it’s sure to make
_some_ change in my size; and as it can’t possibly make me larger, it
must make me smaller, I suppose.”

So she swallowed one of the cakes, and was delighted to find that she
began shrinking directly. As soon as she was small enough to get
through the door, she ran out of the house, and found quite a crowd of
little animals and birds waiting outside. The poor little Lizard, Bill,
was in the middle, being held up by two guinea-pigs, who were giving it
something out of a bottle. They all made a rush at Alice the moment she
appeared; but she ran off as hard as she could, and soon found herself
safe in a thick wood.

“The first thing I’ve got to do,” said Alice to herself, as she
wandered about in the wood, “is to grow to my right size again; and the
second thing is to find my way into that lovely garden. I think that
will be the best plan.”

It sounded an excellent plan, no doubt, and very neatly and simply
arranged; the only difficulty was, that she had not the smallest idea
how to set about it; and while she was peering about anxiously among
the trees, a little sharp bark just over her head made her look up in a
great hurry.

An enormous puppy was looking down at her with large round eyes, and
feebly stretching out one paw, trying to touch her. “Poor little
thing!” said Alice, in a coaxing tone, and she tried hard to whistle to
it; but she was terribly frightened all the time at the thought that it
might be hungry, in which case it would be very likely to eat her up in
spite of all her coaxing.

Hardly knowing what she did, she picked up a little bit of stick, and
held it out to the puppy; whereupon the puppy jumped into the air off
all its feet at once, with a yelp of delight, and rushed at the stick,
and made believe to worry it; then Alice dodged behind a great thistle,
to keep herself from being run over; and the moment she appeared on the
other side, the puppy made another rush at the stick, and tumbled head
over heels in its hurry to get hold of it; then Alice, thinking it was
very like having a game of play with a cart-horse, and expecting every
moment to be trampled under its feet, ran round the thistle again; then
the puppy began a series of short charges at the stick, running a very
little way forwards each time and a long way back, and barking hoarsely
all the while, till at last it sat down a good way off, panting, with
its tongue hanging out of its mouth, and its great eyes half shut.

This seemed to Alice a good opportunity for making her escape; so she
set off at once, and ran till she was quite tired and out of breath,
and till the puppy’s bark sounded quite faint in the distance.

“And yet what a dear little puppy it was!” said Alice, as she leant
against a buttercup to rest herself, and fanned herself with one of the
leaves: “I should have liked teaching it tricks very much, if—if I’d
only been the right size to do it! Oh dear! I’d nearly forgotten that
I’ve got to grow up again! Let me see—how _is_ it to be managed? I
suppose I ought to eat or drink something or other; but the great
question is, what?”

The great question certainly was, what? Alice looked all round her at
the flowers and the blades of grass, but she did not see anything that
looked like the right thing to eat or drink under the circumstances.
There was a large mushroom growing near her, about the same height as
herself; and when she had looked under it, and on both sides of it, and
behind it, it occurred to her that she might as well look and see what
was on the top of it.

She stretched herself up on tiptoe, and peeped over the edge of the
mushroom, and her eyes immediately met those of a large blue
caterpillar, that was sitting on the top with its arms folded, quietly
smoking a long hookah, and taking not the smallest notice of her or of
anything else.




CHAPTER V.
Advice from a Caterpillar


The Caterpillar and Alice looked at each other for some time in
silence: at last the Caterpillar took the hookah out of its mouth, and
addressed her in a languid, sleepy voice.

“Who are _you?_” said the Caterpillar.

This was not an encouraging opening for a conversation. Alice replied,
rather shyly, “I—I hardly know, sir, just at present—at least I know
who I _was_ when I got up this morning, but I think I must have been
changed several times since then.”

“What do you mean by that?” said the Caterpillar sternly. “Explain
yourself!”

“I can’t explain _myself_, I’m afraid, sir,” said Alice, “because I’m
not myself, you see.”

“I don’t see,” said the Caterpillar.

“I’m afraid I can’t put it more clearly,” Alice replied very politely,
“for I can’t understand it myself to begin with; and being so many
different sizes in a day is very confusing.”

“It isn’t,” said the Caterpillar.

“Well, perhaps you haven’t found it so yet,” said Alice; “but when you
have to turn into a chrysalis—you will some day, you know—and then
after that into a butterfly, I should think you’ll feel it a little
queer, won’t you?”

“Not a bit,” said the Caterpillar.

“Well, perhaps your feelings may be different,” said Alice; “all I know
is, it would feel very queer to _me_.”

“You!” said the Caterpillar contemptuously. “Who are _you?_”

Which brought them back again to the beginning of the conversation.
Alice felt a little irritated at the Caterpillar’s making such _very_
short remarks, and she drew herself up and said, very gravely, “I
think, you ought to tell me who _you_ are, first.”

“Why?” said the Caterpillar.

Here was another puzzling question; and as Alice could not think of any
good reason, and as the Caterpillar seemed to be in a _very_ unpleasant
state of mind, she turned away.

“Come back!” the Caterpillar called after her. “I’ve something
important to say!”

This sounded promising, certainly: Alice turned and came back again.

“Keep your temper,” said the Caterpillar.

“Is that all?” said Alice, swallowing down her anger as well as she
could.

“No,” said the Caterpillar.

Alice thought she might as well wait, as she had nothing else to do,
and perhaps after all it might tell her something worth hearing. For
some minutes it puffed away without speaking, but at last it unfolded
its arms, took the hookah out of its mouth again, and said, “So you
think you’re changed, do you?”

“I’m afraid I am, sir,” said Alice; “I can’t remember things as I
used—and I don’t keep the same size for ten minutes together!”

“Can’t remember _what_ things?” said the Caterpillar.

“Well, I’ve tried to say “How doth the little busy bee,” but it all
came different!” Alice replied in a very melancholy voice.

“Repeat, “_You are old, Father William_,’” said the Caterpillar.

Alice folded her hands, and began:—

“You are old, Father William,” the young man said,
    “And your hair has become very white;
And yet you incessantly stand on your head—
    Do you think, at your age, it is right?”

“In my youth,” Father William replied to his son,
    “I feared it might injure the brain;
But, now that I’m perfectly sure I have none,
    Why, I do it again and again.”

“You are old,” said the youth, “as I mentioned before,
    And have grown most uncommonly fat;
Yet you turned a back-somersault in at the door—
    Pray, what is the reason of that?”

“In my youth,” said the sage, as he shook his grey locks,
    “I kept all my limbs very supple
By the use of this ointment—one shilling the box—
    Allow me to sell you a couple?”

“You are old,” said the youth, “and your jaws are too weak
    For anything tougher than suet;
Yet you finished the goose, with the bones and the beak—
    Pray, how did you manage to do it?”

“In my youth,” said his father, “I took to the law,
    And argued each case with my wife;
And the muscular strength, which it gave to my jaw,
    Has lasted the rest of my life.”

“You are old,” said the youth, “one would hardly suppose
    That your eye was as steady as ever;
Yet you balanced an eel on the end of your nose—
    What made you so awfully clever?”

“I have answered three questions, and that is enough,”
    Said his father; “don’t give yourself airs!
Do you think I can listen all day to such stuff?
    Be off, or I’ll kick you down stairs!”


“That is not said right,” said the Caterpillar.

“Not _quite_ right, I’m afraid,” said Alice, timidly; “some of the
words have got altered.”

“It is wrong from beginning to end,” said the Caterpillar decidedly,
and there was silence for some minutes.

The Caterpillar was the first to speak.

“What size do you want to be?” it asked.

“Oh, I’m not particular as to size,” Alice hastily replied; “only one
doesn’t like changing so often, you know.”

“I _don’t_ know,” said the Caterpillar.

Alice said nothing: she had never been so much contradicted in her life
before, and she felt that she was losing her temper.

“Are you content now?” said the Caterpillar.

“Well, I should like to be a _little_ larger, sir, if you wouldn’t
mind,” said Alice: “three inches is such a wretched height to be.”

“It is a very good height indeed!” said the Caterpillar angrily,
rearing itself upright as it spoke (it was exactly three inches high).

“But I’m not used to it!” pleaded poor Alice in a piteous tone. And she
thought of herself, “I wish the creatures wouldn’t be so easily
offended!”

“You’ll get used to it in time,” said the Caterpillar; and it put the
hookah into its mouth and began smoking again.

This time Alice waited patiently until it chose to speak again. In a
minute or two the Caterpillar took the hookah out of its mouth and
yawned once or twice, and shook itself. Then it got down off the
mushroom, and crawled away in the grass, merely remarking as it went,
“One side will make you grow taller, and the other side will make you
grow shorter.”

“One side of _what?_ The other side of _what?_” thought Alice to
herself.

“Of the mushroom,” said the Caterpillar, just as if she had asked it
aloud; and in another moment it was out of sight.

Alice remained looking thoughtfully at the mushroom for a minute,
trying to make out which were the two sides of it; and as it was
perfectly round, she found this a very difficult question. However, at
last she stretched her arms round it as far as they would go, and broke
off a bit of the edge with each hand.

“And now which is which?” she said to herself, and nibbled a little of
the right-hand bit to try the effect: the next moment she felt a
violent blow underneath her chin: it had struck her foot!

She was a good deal frightened by this very sudden change, but she felt
that there was no time to be lost, as she was shrinking rapidly; so she
set to work at once to eat some of the other bit. Her chin was pressed
so closely against her foot, that there was hardly room to open her
mouth; but she did it at last, and managed to swallow a morsel of the
lefthand bit.

*      *      *      *      *      *      *

    *      *      *      *      *      *

*      *      *      *      *      *      *


“Come, my head’s free at last!” said Alice in a tone of delight, which
changed into alarm in another moment, when she found that her shoulders
were nowhere to be found: all she could see, when she looked down, was
an immense length of neck, which seemed to rise like a stalk out of a
sea of green leaves that lay far below her.

“What _can_ all that green stuff be?” said Alice. “And where _have_ my
shoulders got to? And oh, my poor hands, how is it I can’t see you?”
She was moving them about as she spoke, but no result seemed to follow,
except a little shaking among the distant green leaves.

As there seemed to be no chance of getting her hands up to her head,
she tried to get her head down to them, and was delighted to find that
her neck would bend about easily in any direction, like a serpent. She
had just succeeded in curving it down into a graceful zigzag, and was
going to dive in among the leaves, which she found to be nothing but
the tops of the trees under which she had been wandering, when a sharp
hiss made her draw back in a hurry: a large pigeon had flown into her
face, and was beating her violently with its wings.

“Serpent!” screamed the Pigeon.

“I’m _not_ a serpent!” said Alice indignantly. “Let me alone!”

“Serpent, I say again!” repeated the Pigeon, but in a more subdued
tone, and added with a kind of sob, “I’ve tried every way, and nothing
seems to suit them!”

“I haven’t the least idea what you’re talking about,” said Alice.

“I’ve tried the roots of trees, and I’ve tried banks, and I’ve tried
hedges,” the Pigeon went on, without attending to her; “but those
serpents! There’s no pleasing them!”

Alice was more and more puzzled, but she thought there was no use in
saying anything more till the Pigeon had finished.

“As if it wasn’t trouble enough hatching the eggs,” said the Pigeon;
“but I must be on the look-out for serpents night and day! Why, I
haven’t had a wink of sleep these three weeks!”

“I’m very sorry you’ve been annoyed,” said Alice, who was beginning to
see its meaning.

“And just as I’d taken the highest tree in the wood,” continued the
Pigeon, raising its voice to a shriek, “and just as I was thinking I
should be free of them at last, they must needs come wriggling down
from the sky! Ugh, Serpent!”

“But I’m _not_ a serpent, I tell you!” said Alice. “I’m a—I’m a—”

“Well! _What_ are you?” said the Pigeon. “I can see you’re trying to
invent something!”

“I—I’m a little girl,” said Alice, rather doubtfully, as she remembered
the number of changes she had gone through that day.

“A likely story indeed!” said the Pigeon in a tone of the deepest
contempt. “I’ve seen a good many little girls in my time, but never
_one_ with such a neck as that! No, no! You’re a serpent; and there’s
no use denying it. I suppose you’ll be telling me next that you never
tasted an egg!”

“I _have_ tasted eggs, certainly,” said Alice, who was a very truthful
child; “but little girls eat eggs quite as much as serpents do, you
know.”

“I don’t believe it,” said the Pigeon; “but if they do, why then
they’re a kind of serpent, that’s all I can say.”

This was such a new idea to Alice, that she was quite silent for a
minute or two, which gave the Pigeon the opportunity of adding, “You’re
looking for eggs, I know _that_ well enough; and what does it matter to
me whether you’re a little girl or a serpent?”

“It matters a good deal to _me_,” said Alice hastily; “but I’m not
looking for eggs, as it happens; and if I was, I shouldn’t want
_yours_: I don’t like them raw.”

“Well, be off, then!” said the Pigeon in a sulky tone, as it settled
down again into its nest. Alice crouched down among the trees as well
as she could, for her neck kept getting entangled among the branches,
and every now and then she had to stop and untwist it. After a while
she remembered that she still held the pieces of mushroom in her hands,
and she set to work very carefully, nibbling first at one and then at
the other, and growing sometimes taller and sometimes shorter, until
she had succeeded in bringing herself down to her usual height.

It was so long since she had been anything near the right size, that it
felt quite strange at first; but she got used to it in a few minutes,
and began talking to herself, as usual. “Come, there’s half my plan
done now! How puzzling all these changes are! I’m never sure what I’m
going to be, from one minute to another! However, I’ve got back to my
right size: the next thing is, to get into that beautiful garden—how
_is_ that to be done, I wonder?” As she said this, she came suddenly
upon an open place, with a little house in it about four feet high.
“Whoever lives there,” thought Alice, “it’ll never do to come upon them
_this_ size: why, I should frighten them out of their wits!” So she
began nibbling at the righthand bit again, and did not venture to go
near the house till she had brought herself down to nine inches high.




CHAPTER VI.
Pig and Pepper


For a minute or two she stood looking at the house, and wondering what
to do next, when suddenly a footman in livery came running out of the
wood—(she considered him to be a footman because he was in livery:
otherwise, judging by his face only, she would have called him a
fish)—and rapped loudly at the door with his knuckles. It was opened by
another footman in livery, with a round face, and large eyes like a
frog; and both footmen, Alice noticed, had powdered hair that curled
all over their heads. She felt very curious to know what it was all
about, and crept a little way out of the wood to listen.

The Fish-Footman began by producing from under his arm a great letter,
nearly as large as himself, and this he handed over to the other,
saying, in a solemn tone, “For the Duchess. An invitation from the
Queen to play croquet.” The Frog-Footman repeated, in the same solemn
tone, only changing the order of the words a little, “From the Queen.
An invitation for the Duchess to play croquet.”

Then they both bowed low, and their curls got entangled together.

Alice laughed so much at this, that she had to run back into the wood
for fear of their hearing her; and when she next peeped out the
Fish-Footman was gone, and the other was sitting on the ground near the
door, staring stupidly up into the sky.

Alice went timidly up to the door, and knocked.

“There’s no sort of use in knocking,” said the Footman, “and that for
two reasons. First, because I’m on the same side of the door as you
are; secondly, because they’re making such a noise inside, no one could
possibly hear you.” And certainly there _was_ a most extraordinary
noise going on within—a constant howling and sneezing, and every now
and then a great crash, as if a dish or kettle had been broken to
pieces.

“Please, then,” said Alice, “how am I to get in?”

“There might be some sense in your knocking,” the Footman went on
without attending to her, “if we had the door between us. For instance,
if you were _inside_, you might knock, and I could let you out, you
know.” He was looking up into the sky all the time he was speaking, and
this Alice thought decidedly uncivil. “But perhaps he can’t help it,”
she said to herself; “his eyes are so _very_ nearly at the top of his
head. But at any rate he might answer questions.—How am I to get in?”
she repeated, aloud.

“I shall sit here,” the Footman remarked, “till tomorrow—”

At this moment the door of the house opened, and a large plate came
skimming out, straight at the Footman’s head: it just grazed his nose,
and broke to pieces against one of the trees behind him.

“—or next day, maybe,” the Footman continued in the same tone, exactly
as if nothing had happened.

“How am I to get in?” asked Alice again, in a louder tone.

“_Are_ you to get in at all?” said the Footman. “That’s the first
question, you know.”

It was, no doubt: only Alice did not like to be told so. “It’s really
dreadful,” she muttered to herself, “the way all the creatures argue.
It’s enough to drive one crazy!”

The Footman seemed to think this a good opportunity for repeating his
remark, with variations. “I shall sit here,” he said, “on and off, for
days and days.”

“But what am _I_ to do?” said Alice.

“Anything you like,” said the Footman, and began whistling.

“Oh, there’s no use in talking to him,” said Alice desperately: “he’s
perfectly idiotic!” And she opened the door and went in.

The door led right into a large kitchen, which was full of smoke from
one end to the other: the Duchess was sitting on a three-legged stool
in the middle, nursing a baby; the cook was leaning over the fire,
stirring a large cauldron which seemed to be full of soup.

“There’s certainly too much pepper in that soup!” Alice said to
herself, as well as she could for sneezing.

There was certainly too much of it in the air. Even the Duchess sneezed
occasionally; and as for the baby, it was sneezing and howling
alternately without a moment’s pause. The only things in the kitchen
that did not sneeze, were the cook, and a large cat which was sitting
on the hearth and grinning from ear to ear.

“Please would you tell me,” said Alice, a little timidly, for she was
not quite sure whether it was good manners for her to speak first, “why
your cat grins like that?”

“It’s a Cheshire cat,” said the Duchess, “and that’s why. Pig!”

She said the last word with such sudden violence that Alice quite
jumped; but she saw in another moment that it was addressed to the
baby, and not to her, so she took courage, and went on again:—

“I didn’t know that Cheshire cats always grinned; in fact, I didn’t
know that cats _could_ grin.”

“They all can,” said the Duchess; “and most of ’em do.”

“I don’t know of any that do,” Alice said very politely, feeling quite
pleased to have got into a conversation.

“You don’t know much,” said the Duchess; “and that’s a fact.”

Alice did not at all like the tone of this remark, and thought it would
be as well to introduce some other subject of conversation. While she
was trying to fix on one, the cook took the cauldron of soup off the
fire, and at once set to work throwing everything within her reach at
the Duchess and the baby—the fire-irons came first; then followed a
shower of saucepans, plates, and dishes. The Duchess took no notice of
them even when they hit her; and the baby was howling so much already,
that it was quite impossible to say whether the blows hurt it or not.

“Oh, _please_ mind what you’re doing!” cried Alice, jumping up and down
in an agony of terror. “Oh, there goes his _precious_ nose!” as an
unusually large saucepan flew close by it, and very nearly carried it
off.

“If everybody minded their own business,” the Duchess said in a hoarse
growl, “the world would go round a deal faster than it does.”

“Which would _not_ be an advantage,” said Alice, who felt very glad to
get an opportunity of showing off a little of her knowledge. “Just
think of what work it would make with the day and night! You see the
earth takes twenty-four hours to turn round on its axis—”

“Talking of axes,” said the Duchess, “chop off her head!”

Alice glanced rather anxiously at the cook, to see if she meant to take
the hint; but the cook was busily stirring the soup, and seemed not to
be listening, so she went on again: “Twenty-four hours, I _think_; or
is it twelve? I—”

“Oh, don’t bother _me_,” said the Duchess; “I never could abide
figures!” And with that she began nursing her child again, singing a
sort of lullaby to it as she did so, and giving it a violent shake at
the end of every line:

“Speak roughly to your little boy,
    And beat him when he sneezes:
He only does it to annoy,
    Because he knows it teases.”


CHORUS.
(In which the cook and the baby joined):


“Wow! wow! wow!”


While the Duchess sang the second verse of the song, she kept tossing
the baby violently up and down, and the poor little thing howled so,
that Alice could hardly hear the words:—

“I speak severely to my boy,
    I beat him when he sneezes;
For he can thoroughly enjoy
    The pepper when he pleases!”


CHORUS.


“Wow! wow! wow!”


“Here! you may nurse it a bit, if you like!” the Duchess said to Alice,
flinging the baby at her as she spoke. “I must go and get ready to play
croquet with the Queen,” and she hurried out of the room. The cook
threw a frying-pan after her as she went out, but it just missed her.

Alice caught the baby with some difficulty, as it was a queer-shaped
little creature, and held out its arms and legs in all directions,
“just like a star-fish,” thought Alice. The poor little thing was
snorting like a steam-engine when she caught it, and kept doubling
itself up and straightening itself out again, so that altogether, for
the first minute or two, it was as much as she could do to hold it.

As soon as she had made out the proper way of nursing it, (which was to
twist it up into a sort of knot, and then keep tight hold of its right
ear and left foot, so as to prevent its undoing itself,) she carried it
out into the open air. “If I don’t take this child away with me,”
thought Alice, “they’re sure to kill it in a day or two: wouldn’t it be
murder to leave it behind?” She said the last words out loud, and the
little thing grunted in reply (it had left off sneezing by this time).
“Don’t grunt,” said Alice; “that’s not at all a proper way of
expressing yourself.”

The baby grunted again, and Alice looked very anxiously into its face
to see what was the matter with it. There could be no doubt that it had
a _very_ turn-up nose, much more like a snout than a real nose; also
its eyes were getting extremely small for a baby: altogether Alice did
not like the look of the thing at all. “But perhaps it was only
sobbing,” she thought, and looked into its eyes again, to see if there
were any tears.

No, there were no tears. “If you’re going to turn into a pig, my dear,”
said Alice, seriously, “I’ll have nothing more to do with you. Mind
now!” The poor little thing sobbed again (or grunted, it was impossible
to say which), and they went on for some while in silence.

Alice was just beginning to think to herself, “Now, what am I to do
with this creature when I get it home?” when it grunted again, so
violently, that she looked down into its face in some alarm. This time
there could be _no_ mistake about it: it was neither more nor less than
a pig, and she felt that it would be quite absurd for her to carry it
further.

So she set the little creature down, and felt quite relieved to see it
trot away quietly into the wood. “If it had grown up,” she said to
herself, “it would have made a dreadfully ugly child: but it makes
rather a handsome pig, I think.” And she began thinking over other
children she knew, who might do very well as pigs, and was just saying
to herself, “if one only knew the right way to change them—” when she
was a little startled by seeing the Cheshire Cat sitting on a bough of
a tree a few yards off.

The Cat only grinned when it saw Alice. It looked good-natured, she
thought: still it had _very_ long claws and a great many teeth, so she
felt that it ought to be treated with respect.

“Cheshire Puss,” she began, rather timidly, as she did not at all know
whether it would like the name: however, it only grinned a little
wider. “Come, it’s pleased so far,” thought Alice, and she went on.
“Would you tell me, please, which way I ought to go from here?”

“That depends a good deal on where you want to get to,” said the Cat.

“I don’t much care where—” said Alice.

“Then it doesn’t matter which way you go,” said the Cat.

“—so long as I get _somewhere_,” Alice added as an explanation.

“Oh, you’re sure to do that,” said the Cat, “if you only walk long
enough.”

Alice felt that this could not be denied, so she tried another
question. “What sort of people live about here?”

“In _that_ direction,” the Cat said, waving its right paw round, “lives
a Hatter: and in _that_ direction,” waving the other paw, “lives a
March Hare. Visit either you like: they’re both mad.”

“But I don’t want to go among mad people,” Alice remarked.

“Oh, you can’t help that,” said the Cat: “we’re all mad here. I’m mad.
You’re mad.”

“How do you know I’m mad?” said Alice.

“You must be,” said the Cat, “or you wouldn’t have come here.”

Alice didn’t think that proved it at all; however, she went on “And how
do you know that you’re mad?”

“To begin with,” said the Cat, “a dog’s not mad. You grant that?”

“I suppose so,” said Alice.

“Well, then,” the Cat went on, “you see, a dog growls when it’s angry,
and wags its tail when it’s pleased. Now _I_ growl when I’m pleased,
and wag my tail when I’m angry. Therefore I’m mad.”

“_I_ call it purring, not growling,” said Alice.

“Call it what you like,” said the Cat. “Do you play croquet with the
Queen to-day?”

“I should like it very much,” said Alice, “but I haven’t been invited
yet.”

“You’ll see me there,” said the Cat, and vanished.

Alice was not much surprised at this, she was getting so used to queer
things happening. While she was looking at the place where it had been,
it suddenly appeared again.

“By-the-bye, what became of the baby?” said the Cat. “I’d nearly
forgotten to ask.”

“It turned into a pig,” Alice quietly said, just as if it had come back
in a natural way.

“I thought it would,” said the Cat, and vanished again.

Alice waited a little, half expecting to see it again, but it did not
appear, and after a minute or two she walked on in the direction in
which the March Hare was said to live. “I’ve seen hatters before,” she
said to herself; “the March Hare will be much the most interesting, and
perhaps as this is May it won’t be raving mad—at least not so mad as it
was in March.” As she said this, she looked up, and there was the Cat
again, sitting on a branch of a tree.

“Did you say pig, or fig?” said the Cat.

“I said pig,” replied Alice; “and I wish you wouldn’t keep appearing
and vanishing so suddenly: you make one quite giddy.”

“All right,” said the Cat; and this time it vanished quite slowly,
beginning with the end of the tail, and ending with the grin, which
remained some time after the rest of it had gone.

“Well! I’ve often seen a cat without a grin,” thought Alice; “but a
grin without a cat! It’s the most curious thing I ever saw in my life!”

She had not gone much farther before she came in sight of the house of
the March Hare: she thought it must be the right house, because the
chimneys were shaped like ears and the roof was thatched with fur. It
was so large a house, that she did not like to go nearer till she had
nibbled some more of the lefthand bit of mushroom, and raised herself
to about two feet high: even then she walked up towards it rather
timidly, saying to herself “Suppose it should be raving mad after all!
I almost wish I’d gone to see the Hatter instead!”




CHAPTER VII.
A Mad Tea-Party


There was a table set out under a tree in front of the house, and the
March Hare and the Hatter were having tea at it: a Dormouse was sitting
between them, fast asleep, and the other two were using it as a
cushion, resting their elbows on it, and talking over its head. “Very
uncomfortable for the Dormouse,” thought Alice; “only, as it’s asleep,
I suppose it doesn’t mind.”

The table was a large one, but the three were all crowded together at
one corner of it: “No room! No room!” they cried out when they saw
Alice coming. “There’s _plenty_ of room!” said Alice indignantly, and
she sat down in a large arm-chair at one end of the table.

“Have some wine,” the March Hare said in an encouraging tone.

Alice looked all round the table, but there was nothing on it but tea.
“I don’t see any wine,” she remarked.

“There isn’t any,” said the March Hare.

“Then it wasn’t very civil of you to offer it,” said Alice angrily.

“It wasn’t very civil of you to sit down without being invited,” said
the March Hare.

“I didn’t know it was _your_ table,” said Alice; “it’s laid for a great
many more than three.”

“Your hair wants cutting,” said the Hatter. He had been looking at
Alice for some time with great curiosity, and this was his first
speech.

“You should learn not to make personal remarks,” Alice said with some
severity; “it’s very rude.”

The Hatter opened his eyes very wide on hearing this; but all he _said_
was, “Why is a raven like a writing-desk?”

“Come, we shall have some fun now!” thought Alice. “I’m glad they’ve
begun asking riddles.—I believe I can guess that,” she added aloud.

“Do you mean that you think you can find out the answer to it?” said
the March Hare.

“Exactly so,” said Alice.

“Then you should say what you mean,” the March Hare went on.

“I do,” Alice hastily replied; “at least—at least I mean what I
say—that’s the same thing, you know.”

“Not the same thing a bit!” said the Hatter. “You might just as well
say that ‘I see what I eat’ is the same thing as ‘I eat what I see’!”

“You might just as well say,” added the March Hare, “that ‘I like what
I get’ is the same thing as ‘I get what I like’!”

“You might just as well say,” added the Dormouse, who seemed to be
talking in his sleep, “that ‘I breathe when I sleep’ is the same thing
as ‘I sleep when I breathe’!”

“It _is_ the same thing with you,” said the Hatter, and here the
conversation dropped, and the party sat silent for a minute, while
Alice thought over all she could remember about ravens and
writing-desks, which wasn’t much.

The Hatter was the first to break the silence. “What day of the month
is it?” he said, turning to Alice: he had taken his watch out of his
pocket, and was looking at it uneasily, shaking it every now and then,
and holding it to his ear.

Alice considered a little, and then said “The fourth.”

“Two days wrong!” sighed the Hatter. “I told you butter wouldn’t suit
the works!” he added looking angrily at the March Hare.

“It was the _best_ butter,” the March Hare meekly replied.

“Yes, but some crumbs must have got in as well,” the Hatter grumbled:
“you shouldn’t have put it in with the bread-knife.”

The March Hare took the watch and looked at it gloomily: then he dipped
it into his cup of tea, and looked at it again: but he could think of
nothing better to say than his first remark, “It was the _best_ butter,
you know.”

Alice had been looking over his shoulder with some curiosity. “What a
funny watch!” she remarked. “It tells the day of the month, and doesn’t
tell what o’clock it is!”

“Why should it?” muttered the Hatter. “Does _your_ watch tell you what
year it is?”

“Of course not,” Alice replied very readily: “but that’s because it
stays the same year for such a long time together.”

“Which is just the case with _mine_,” said the Hatter.

Alice felt dreadfully puzzled. The Hatter’s remark seemed to have no
sort of meaning in it, and yet it was certainly English. “I don’t quite
understand you,” she said, as politely as she could.

“The Dormouse is asleep again,” said the Hatter, and he poured a little
hot tea upon its nose.

The Dormouse shook its head impatiently, and said, without opening its
eyes, “Of course, of course; just what I was going to remark myself.”

“Have you guessed the riddle yet?” the Hatter said, turning to Alice
again.

“No, I give it up,” Alice replied: “what’s the answer?”

“I haven’t the slightest idea,” said the Hatter.

“Nor I,” said the March Hare.

Alice sighed wearily. “I think you might do something better with the
time,” she said, “than waste it in asking riddles that have no
answers.”

“If you knew Time as well as I do,” said the Hatter, “you wouldn’t talk
about wasting _it_. It’s _him_.”

“I don’t know what you mean,” said Alice.

“Of course you don’t!” the Hatter said, tossing his head
contemptuously. “I dare say you never even spoke to Time!”

“Perhaps not,” Alice cautiously replied: “but I know I have to beat
time when I learn music.”

“Ah! that accounts for it,” said the Hatter. “He won’t stand beating.
Now, if you only kept on good terms with him, he’d do almost anything
you liked with the clock. For instance, suppose it were nine o’clock in
the morning, just time to begin lessons: you’d only have to whisper a
hint to Time, and round goes the clock in a twinkling! Half-past one,
time for dinner!”

(“I only wish it was,” the March Hare said to itself in a whisper.)

“That would be grand, certainly,” said Alice thoughtfully: “but then—I
shouldn’t be hungry for it, you know.”

“Not at first, perhaps,” said the Hatter: “but you could keep it to
half-past one as long as you liked.”

“Is that the way _you_ manage?” Alice asked.

The Hatter shook his head mournfully. “Not I!” he replied. “We
quarrelled last March—just before _he_ went mad, you know—” (pointing
with his tea spoon at the March Hare,) “—it was at the great concert
given by the Queen of Hearts, and I had to sing

‘Twinkle, twinkle, little bat!
How I wonder what you’re at!’


You know the song, perhaps?”

“I’ve heard something like it,” said Alice.

“It goes on, you know,” the Hatter continued, “in this way:—

‘Up above the world you fly,
Like a tea-tray in the sky.
                    Twinkle, twinkle—’”


Here the Dormouse shook itself, and began singing in its sleep
“_Twinkle, twinkle, twinkle, twinkle_—” and went on so long that they
had to pinch it to make it stop.

“Well, I’d hardly finished the first verse,” said the Hatter, “when the
Queen jumped up and bawled out, ‘He’s murdering the time! Off with his
head!’”

“How dreadfully savage!” exclaimed Alice.

“And ever since that,” the Hatter went on in a mournful tone, “he won’t
do a thing I ask! It’s always six o’clock now.”

A bright idea came into Alice’s head. “Is that the reason so many
tea-things are put out here?” she asked.

“Yes, that’s it,” said the Hatter with a sigh: “it’s always tea-time,
and we’ve no time to wash the things between whiles.”

“Then you keep moving round, I suppose?” said Alice.

“Exactly so,” said the Hatter: “as the things get used up.”

“But what happens when you come to the beginning again?” Alice ventured
to ask.

“Suppose we change the subject,” the March Hare interrupted, yawning.
“I’m getting tired of this. I vote the young lady tells us a story.”

“I’m afraid I don’t know one,” said Alice, rather alarmed at the
proposal.

“Then the Dormouse shall!” they both cried. “Wake up, Dormouse!” And
they pinched it on both sides at once.

The Dormouse slowly opened his eyes. “I wasn’t asleep,” he said in a
hoarse, feeble voice: “I heard every word you fellows were saying.”

“Tell us a story!” said the March Hare.

“Yes, please do!” pleaded Alice.

“And be quick about it,” added the Hatter, “or you’ll be asleep again
before it’s done.”

“Once upon a time there were three little sisters,” the Dormouse began
in a great hurry; “and their names were Elsie, Lacie, and Tillie; and
they lived at the bottom of a well—”

“What did they live on?” said Alice, who always took a great interest
in questions of eating and drinking.

“They lived on treacle,” said the Dormouse, after thinking a minute or
two.

“They couldn’t have done that, you know,” Alice gently remarked;
“they’d have been ill.”

“So they were,” said the Dormouse; “_very_ ill.”

Alice tried to fancy to herself what such an extraordinary ways of
living would be like, but it puzzled her too much, so she went on: “But
why did they live at the bottom of a well?”

“Take some more tea,” the March Hare said to Alice, very earnestly.

“I’ve had nothing yet,” Alice replied in an offended tone, “so I can’t
take more.”

“You mean you can’t take _less_,” said the Hatter: “it’s very easy to
take _more_ than nothing.”

“Nobody asked _your_ opinion,” said Alice.

“Who’s making personal remarks now?” the Hatter asked triumphantly.

Alice did not quite know what to say to this: so she helped herself to
some tea and bread-and-butter, and then turned to the Dormouse, and
repeated her question. “Why did they live at the bottom of a well?”

The Dormouse again took a minute or two to think about it, and then
said, “It was a treacle-well.”

“There’s no such thing!” Alice was beginning very angrily, but the
Hatter and the March Hare went “Sh! sh!” and the Dormouse sulkily
remarked, “If you can’t be civil, you’d better finish the story for
yourself.”

“No, please go on!” Alice said very humbly; “I won’t interrupt again. I
dare say there may be _one_.”

“One, indeed!” said the Dormouse indignantly. However, he consented to
go on. “And so these three little sisters—they were learning to draw,
you know—”

“What did they draw?” said Alice, quite forgetting her promise.

“Treacle,” said the Dormouse, without considering at all this time.

“I want a clean cup,” interrupted the Hatter: “let’s all move one place
on.”

He moved on as he spoke, and the Dormouse followed him: the March Hare
moved into the Dormouse’s place, and Alice rather unwillingly took the
place of the March Hare. The Hatter was the only one who got any
advantage from the change: and Alice was a good deal worse off than
before, as the March Hare had just upset the milk-jug into his plate.

Alice did not wish to offend the Dormouse again, so she began very
cautiously: “But I don’t understand. Where did they draw the treacle
from?”

“You can draw water out of a water-well,” said the Hatter; “so I should
think you could draw treacle out of a treacle-well—eh, stupid?”

“But they were _in_ the well,” Alice said to the Dormouse, not choosing
to notice this last remark.

“Of course they were,” said the Dormouse; “—well in.”

This answer so confused poor Alice, that she let the Dormouse go on for
some time without interrupting it.

“They were learning to draw,” the Dormouse went on, yawning and rubbing
its eyes, for it was getting very sleepy; “and they drew all manner of
things—everything that begins with an M—”

“Why with an M?” said Alice.

“Why not?” said the March Hare.

Alice was silent.

The Dormouse had closed its eyes by this time, and was going off into a
doze; but, on being pinched by the Hatter, it woke up again with a
little shriek, and went on: “—that begins with an M, such as
mouse-traps, and the moon, and memory, and muchness—you know you say
things are “much of a muchness”—did you ever see such a thing as a
drawing of a muchness?”

“Really, now you ask me,” said Alice, very much confused, “I don’t
think—”

“Then you shouldn’t talk,” said the Hatter.

This piece of rudeness was more than Alice could bear: she got up in
great disgust, and walked off; the Dormouse fell asleep instantly, and
neither of the others took the least notice of her going, though she
looked back once or twice, half hoping that they would call after her:
the last time she saw them, they were trying to put the Dormouse into
the teapot.

“At any rate I’ll never go _there_ again!” said Alice as she picked her
way through the wood. “It’s the stupidest tea-party I ever was at in
all my life!”

Just as she said this, she noticed that one of the trees had a door
leading right into it. “That’s very curious!” she thought. “But
everything’s curious today. I think I may as well go in at once.” And
in she went.

Once more she found herself in the long hall, and close to the little
glass table. “Now, I’ll manage better this time,” she said to herself,
and began by taking the little golden key, and unlocking the door that
led into the garden. Then she went to work nibbling at the mushroom
(she had kept a piece of it in her pocket) till she was about a foot
high: then she walked down the little passage: and _then_—she found
herself at last in the beautiful garden, among the bright flower-beds
and the cool fountains.




CHAPTER VIII.
The Queen’s Croquet-Ground


A large rose-tree stood near the entrance of the garden: the roses
growing on it were white, but there were three gardeners at it, busily
painting them red. Alice thought this a very curious thing, and she
went nearer to watch them, and just as she came up to them she heard
one of them say, “Look out now, Five! Don’t go splashing paint over me
like that!”

“I couldn’t help it,” said Five, in a sulky tone; “Seven jogged my
elbow.”

On which Seven looked up and said, “That’s right, Five! Always lay the
blame on others!”

“_You’d_ better not talk!” said Five. “I heard the Queen say only
yesterday you deserved to be beheaded!”

“What for?” said the one who had spoken first.

“That’s none of _your_ business, Two!” said Seven.

“Yes, it _is_ his business!” said Five, “and I’ll tell him—it was for
bringing the cook tulip-roots instead of onions.”

Seven flung down his brush, and had just begun “Well, of all the unjust
things—” when his eye chanced to fall upon Alice, as she stood watching
them, and he checked himself suddenly: the others looked round also,
and all of them bowed low.

“Would you tell me,” said Alice, a little timidly, “why you are
painting those roses?”

Five and Seven said nothing, but looked at Two. Two began in a low
voice, “Why the fact is, you see, Miss, this here ought to have been a
_red_ rose-tree, and we put a white one in by mistake; and if the Queen
was to find it out, we should all have our heads cut off, you know. So
you see, Miss, we’re doing our best, afore she comes, to—” At this
moment Five, who had been anxiously looking across the garden, called
out “The Queen! The Queen!” and the three gardeners instantly threw
themselves flat upon their faces. There was a sound of many footsteps,
and Alice looked round, eager to see the Queen.

First came ten soldiers carrying clubs; these were all shaped like the
three gardeners, oblong and flat, with their hands and feet at the
corners: next the ten courtiers; these were ornamented all over with
diamonds, and walked two and two, as the soldiers did. After these came
the royal children; there were ten of them, and the little dears came
jumping merrily along hand in hand, in couples: they were all
ornamented with hearts. Next came the guests, mostly Kings and Queens,
and among them Alice recognised the White Rabbit: it was talking in a
hurried nervous manner, smiling at everything that was said, and went
by without noticing her. Then followed the Knave of Hearts, carrying
the King’s crown on a crimson velvet cushion; and, last of all this
grand procession, came THE KING AND QUEEN OF HEARTS.

Alice was rather doubtful whether she ought not to lie down on her face
like the three gardeners, but she could not remember ever having heard
of such a rule at processions; “and besides, what would be the use of a
procession,” thought she, “if people had all to lie down upon their
faces, so that they couldn’t see it?” So she stood still where she was,
and waited.

When the procession came opposite to Alice, they all stopped and looked
at her, and the Queen said severely “Who is this?” She said it to the
Knave of Hearts, who only bowed and smiled in reply.

“Idiot!” said the Queen, tossing her head impatiently; and, turning to
Alice, she went on, “What’s your name, child?”

“My name is Alice, so please your Majesty,” said Alice very politely;
but she added, to herself, “Why, they’re only a pack of cards, after
all. I needn’t be afraid of them!”

“And who are _these?_” said the Queen, pointing to the three gardeners
who were lying round the rose-tree; for, you see, as they were lying on
their faces, and the pattern on their backs was the same as the rest of
the pack, she could not tell whether they were gardeners, or soldiers,
or courtiers, or three of her own children.

“How should _I_ know?” said Alice, surprised at her own courage. “It’s
no business of _mine_.”

The Queen turned crimson with fury, and, after glaring at her for a
moment like a wild beast, screamed “Off with her head! Off—”

“Nonsense!” said Alice, very loudly and decidedly, and the Queen was
silent.

The King laid his hand upon her arm, and timidly said “Consider, my
dear: she is only a child!”

The Queen turned angrily away from him, and said to the Knave “Turn
them over!”

The Knave did so, very carefully, with one foot.

“Get up!” said the Queen, in a shrill, loud voice, and the three
gardeners instantly jumped up, and began bowing to the King, the Queen,
the royal children, and everybody else.

“Leave off that!” screamed the Queen. “You make me giddy.” And then,
turning to the rose-tree, she went on, “What _have_ you been doing
here?”

“May it please your Majesty,” said Two, in a very humble tone, going
down on one knee as he spoke, “we were trying—”

“_I_ see!” said the Queen, who had meanwhile been examining the roses.
“Off with their heads!” and the procession moved on, three of the
soldiers remaining behind to execute the unfortunate gardeners, who ran
to Alice for protection.

“You shan’t be beheaded!” said Alice, and she put them into a large
flower-pot that stood near. The three soldiers wandered about for a
minute or two, looking for them, and then quietly marched off after the
others.

“Are their heads off?” shouted the Queen.

“Their heads are gone, if it please your Majesty!” the soldiers shouted
in reply.

“That’s right!” shouted the Queen. “Can you play croquet?”

The soldiers were silent, and looked at Alice, as the question was
evidently meant for her.

“Yes!” shouted Alice.

“Come on, then!” roared the Queen, and Alice joined the procession,
wondering very much what would happen next.

“It’s—it’s a very fine day!” said a timid voice at her side. She was
walking by the White Rabbit, who was peeping anxiously into her face.

“Very,” said Alice: “—where’s the Duchess?”

“Hush! Hush!” said the Rabbit in a low, hurried tone. He looked
anxiously over his shoulder as he spoke, and then raised himself upon
tiptoe, put his mouth close to her ear, and whispered “She’s under
sentence of execution.”

“What for?” said Alice.

“Did you say ‘What a pity!’?” the Rabbit asked.

“No, I didn’t,” said Alice: “I don’t think it’s at all a pity. I said
‘What for?’”

“She boxed the Queen’s ears—” the Rabbit began. Alice gave a little
scream of laughter. “Oh, hush!” the Rabbit whispered in a frightened
tone. “The Queen will hear you! You see, she came rather late, and the
Queen said—”

“Get to your places!” shouted the Queen in a voice of thunder, and
people began running about in all directions, tumbling up against each
other; however, they got settled down in a minute or two, and the game
began. Alice thought she had never seen such a curious croquet-ground
in her life; it was all ridges and furrows; the balls were live
hedgehogs, the mallets live flamingoes, and the soldiers had to double
themselves up and to stand on their hands and feet, to make the arches.

The chief difficulty Alice found at first was in managing her flamingo:
she succeeded in getting its body tucked away, comfortably enough,
under her arm, with its legs hanging down, but generally, just as she
had got its neck nicely straightened out, and was going to give the
hedgehog a blow with its head, it _would_ twist itself round and look
up in her face, with such a puzzled expression that she could not help
bursting out laughing: and when she had got its head down, and was
going to begin again, it was very provoking to find that the hedgehog
had unrolled itself, and was in the act of crawling away: besides all
this, there was generally a ridge or furrow in the way wherever she
wanted to send the hedgehog to, and, as the doubled-up soldiers were
always getting up and walking off to other parts of the ground, Alice
soon came to the conclusion that it was a very difficult game indeed.

The players all played at once without waiting for turns, quarrelling
all the while, and fighting for the hedgehogs; and in a very short time
the Queen was in a furious passion, and went stamping about, and
shouting “Off with his head!” or “Off with her head!” about once in a
minute.

Alice began to feel very uneasy: to be sure, she had not as yet had any
dispute with the Queen, but she knew that it might happen any minute,
“and then,” thought she, “what would become of me? They’re dreadfully
fond of beheading people here; the great wonder is, that there’s any
one left alive!”

She was looking about for some way of escape, and wondering whether she
could get away without being seen, when she noticed a curious
appearance in the air: it puzzled her very much at first, but, after
watching it a minute or two, she made it out to be a grin, and she said
to herself “It’s the Cheshire Cat: now I shall have somebody to talk
to.”

“How are you getting on?” said the Cat, as soon as there was mouth
enough for it to speak with.

Alice waited till the eyes appeared, and then nodded. “It’s no use
speaking to it,” she thought, “till its ears have come, or at least one
of them.” In another minute the whole head appeared, and then Alice put
down her flamingo, and began an account of the game, feeling very glad
she had someone to listen to her. The Cat seemed to think that there
was enough of it now in sight, and no more of it appeared.

“I don’t think they play at all fairly,” Alice began, in rather a
complaining tone, “and they all quarrel so dreadfully one can’t hear
oneself speak—and they don’t seem to have any rules in particular; at
least, if there are, nobody attends to them—and you’ve no idea how
confusing it is all the things being alive; for instance, there’s the
arch I’ve got to go through next walking about at the other end of the
ground—and I should have croqueted the Queen’s hedgehog just now, only
it ran away when it saw mine coming!”

“How do you like the Queen?” said the Cat in a low voice.

“Not at all,” said Alice: “she’s so extremely—” Just then she noticed
that the Queen was close behind her, listening: so she went on,
“—likely to win, that it’s hardly worth while finishing the game.”

The Queen smiled and passed on.

“Who _are_ you talking to?” said the King, going up to Alice, and
looking at the Cat’s head with great curiosity.

“It’s a friend of mine—a Cheshire Cat,” said Alice: “allow me to
introduce it.”

“I don’t like the look of it at all,” said the King: “however, it may
kiss my hand if it likes.”

“I’d rather not,” the Cat remarked.

“Don’t be impertinent,” said the King, “and don’t look at me like
that!” He got behind Alice as he spoke.

“A cat may look at a king,” said Alice. “I’ve read that in some book,
but I don’t remember where.”

“Well, it must be removed,” said the King very decidedly, and he called
the Queen, who was passing at the moment, “My dear! I wish you would
have this cat removed!”

The Queen had only one way of settling all difficulties, great or
small. “Off with his head!” she said, without even looking round.

“I’ll fetch the executioner myself,” said the King eagerly, and he
hurried off.

Alice thought she might as well go back, and see how the game was going
on, as she heard the Queen’s voice in the distance, screaming with
passion. She had already heard her sentence three of the players to be
executed for having missed their turns, and she did not like the look
of things at all, as the game was in such confusion that she never knew
whether it was her turn or not. So she went in search of her hedgehog.

The hedgehog was engaged in a fight with another hedgehog, which seemed
to Alice an excellent opportunity for croqueting one of them with the
other: the only difficulty was, that her flamingo was gone across to
the other side of the garden, where Alice could see it trying in a
helpless sort of way to fly up into a tree.

By the time she had caught the flamingo and brought it back, the fight
was over, and both the hedgehogs were out of sight: “but it doesn’t
matter much,” thought Alice, “as all the arches are gone from this side
of the ground.” So she tucked it away under her arm, that it might not
escape again, and went back for a little more conversation with her
friend.

When she got back to the Cheshire Cat, she was surprised to find quite
a large crowd collected round it: there was a dispute going on between
the executioner, the King, and the Queen, who were all talking at once,
while all the rest were quite silent, and looked very uncomfortable.

The moment Alice appeared, she was appealed to by all three to settle
the question, and they repeated their arguments to her, though, as they
all spoke at once, she found it very hard indeed to make out exactly
what they said.

The executioner’s argument was, that you couldn’t cut off a head unless
there was a body to cut it off from: that he had never had to do such a
thing before, and he wasn’t going to begin at _his_ time of life.

The King’s argument was, that anything that had a head could be
beheaded, and that you weren’t to talk nonsense.

The Queen’s argument was, that if something wasn’t done about it in
less than no time she’d have everybody executed, all round. (It was
this last remark that had made the whole party look so grave and
anxious.)

Alice could think of nothing else to say but “It belongs to the
Duchess: you’d better ask _her_ about it.”

“She’s in prison,” the Queen said to the executioner: “fetch her here.”
And the executioner went off like an arrow.

The Cat’s head began fading away the moment he was gone, and, by the
time he had come back with the Duchess, it had entirely disappeared; so
the King and the executioner ran wildly up and down looking for it,
while the rest of the party went back to the game.




CHAPTER IX.
The Mock Turtle’s Story


“You can’t think how glad I am to see you again, you dear old thing!”
said the Duchess, as she tucked her arm affectionately into Alice’s,
and they walked off together.

Alice was very glad to find her in such a pleasant temper, and thought
to herself that perhaps it was only the pepper that had made her so
savage when they met in the kitchen.

“When _I’m_ a Duchess,” she said to herself, (not in a very hopeful
tone though), “I won’t have any pepper in my kitchen _at all_. Soup
does very well without—Maybe it’s always pepper that makes people
hot-tempered,” she went on, very much pleased at having found out a new
kind of rule, “and vinegar that makes them sour—and camomile that makes
them bitter—and—and barley-sugar and such things that make children
sweet-tempered. I only wish people knew _that_: then they wouldn’t be
so stingy about it, you know—”

She had quite forgotten the Duchess by this time, and was a little
startled when she heard her voice close to her ear. “You’re thinking
about something, my dear, and that makes you forget to talk. I can’t
tell you just now what the moral of that is, but I shall remember it in
a bit.”

“Perhaps it hasn’t one,” Alice ventured to remark.

“Tut, tut, child!” said the Duchess. “Everything’s got a moral, if only
you can find it.” And she squeezed herself up closer to Alice’s side as
she spoke.

Alice did not much like keeping so close to her: first, because the
Duchess was _very_ ugly; and secondly, because she was exactly the
right height to rest her chin upon Alice’s shoulder, and it was an
uncomfortably sharp chin. However, she did not like to be rude, so she
bore it as well as she could.

“The game’s going on rather better now,” she said, by way of keeping up
the conversation a little.

“’Tis so,” said the Duchess: “and the moral of that is—‘Oh, ’tis love,
’tis love, that makes the world go round!’”

“Somebody said,” Alice whispered, “that it’s done by everybody minding
their own business!”

“Ah, well! It means much the same thing,” said the Duchess, digging her
sharp little chin into Alice’s shoulder as she added, “and the moral of
_that_ is—‘Take care of the sense, and the sounds will take care of
themselves.’”

“How fond she is of finding morals in things!” Alice thought to
herself.

“I dare say you’re wondering why I don’t put my arm round your waist,”
the Duchess said after a pause: “the reason is, that I’m doubtful about
the temper of your flamingo. Shall I try the experiment?”

“He might bite,” Alice cautiously replied, not feeling at all anxious
to have the experiment tried.

“Very true,” said the Duchess: “flamingoes and mustard both bite. And
the moral of that is—‘Birds of a feather flock together.’”

“Only mustard isn’t a bird,” Alice remarked.

“Right, as usual,” said the Duchess: “what a clear way you have of
putting things!”

“It’s a mineral, I _think_,” said Alice.

“Of course it is,” said the Duchess, who seemed ready to agree to
everything that Alice said; “there’s a large mustard-mine near here.
And the moral of that is—‘The more there is of mine, the less there is
of yours.’”

“Oh, I know!” exclaimed Alice, who had not attended to this last
remark, “it’s a vegetable. It doesn’t look like one, but it is.”

“I quite agree with you,” said the Duchess; “and the moral of that
is—‘Be what you would seem to be’—or if you’d like it put more
simply—‘Never imagine yourself not to be otherwise than what it might
appear to others that what you were or might have been was not
otherwise than what you had been would have appeared to them to be
otherwise.’”

“I think I should understand that better,” Alice said very politely,
“if I had it written down: but I can’t quite follow it as you say it.”

“That’s nothing to what I could say if I chose,” the Duchess replied,
in a pleased tone.

“Pray don’t trouble yourself to say it any longer than that,” said
Alice.

“Oh, don’t talk about trouble!” said the Duchess. “I make you a present
of everything I’ve said as yet.”

“A cheap sort of present!” thought Alice. “I’m glad they don’t give
birthday presents like that!” But she did not venture to say it out
loud.

“Thinking again?” the Duchess asked, with another dig of her sharp
little chin.

“I’ve a right to think,” said Alice sharply, for she was beginning to
feel a little worried.

“Just about as much right,” said the Duchess, “as pigs have to fly; and
the m—”

But here, to Alice’s great surprise, the Duchess’s voice died away,
even in the middle of her favourite word ‘moral,’ and the arm that was
linked into hers began to tremble. Alice looked up, and there stood the
Queen in front of them, with her arms folded, frowning like a
thunderstorm.

“A fine day, your Majesty!” the Duchess began in a low, weak voice.

“Now, I give you fair warning,” shouted the Queen, stamping on the
ground as she spoke; “either you or your head must be off, and that in
about half no time! Take your choice!”

The Duchess took her choice, and was gone in a moment.

“Let’s go on with the game,” the Queen said to Alice; and Alice was too
much frightened to say a word, but slowly followed her back to the
croquet-ground.

The other guests had taken advantage of the Queen’s absence, and were
resting in the shade: however, the moment they saw her, they hurried
back to the game, the Queen merely remarking that a moment’s delay
would cost them their lives.

All the time they were playing the Queen never left off quarrelling
with the other players, and shouting “Off with his head!” or “Off with
her head!” Those whom she sentenced were taken into custody by the
soldiers, who of course had to leave off being arches to do this, so
that by the end of half an hour or so there were no arches left, and
all the players, except the King, the Queen, and Alice, were in custody
and under sentence of execution.

Then the Queen left off, quite out of breath, and said to Alice, “Have
you seen the Mock Turtle yet?”

“No,” said Alice. “I don’t even know what a Mock Turtle is.”

“It’s the thing Mock Turtle Soup is made from,” said the Queen.

“I never saw one, or heard of one,” said Alice.

“Come on, then,” said the Queen, “and he shall tell you his history,”

As they walked off together, Alice heard the King say in a low voice,
to the company generally, “You are all pardoned.” “Come, _that’s_ a
good thing!” she said to herself, for she had felt quite unhappy at the
number of executions the Queen had ordered.

They very soon came upon a Gryphon, lying fast asleep in the sun. (If
you don’t know what a Gryphon is, look at the picture.) “Up, lazy
thing!” said the Queen, “and take this young lady to see the Mock
Turtle, and to hear his history. I must go back and see after some
executions I have ordered;” and she walked off, leaving Alice alone
with the Gryphon. Alice did not quite like the look of the creature,
but on the whole she thought it would be quite as safe to stay with it
as to go after that savage Queen: so she waited.

The Gryphon sat up and rubbed its eyes: then it watched the Queen till
she was out of sight: then it chuckled. “What fun!” said the Gryphon,
half to itself, half to Alice.

“What _is_ the fun?” said Alice.

“Why, _she_,” said the Gryphon. “It’s all her fancy, that: they never
executes nobody, you know. Come on!”

“Everybody says ‘come on!’ here,” thought Alice, as she went slowly
after it: “I never was so ordered about in all my life, never!”

They had not gone far before they saw the Mock Turtle in the distance,
sitting sad and lonely on a little ledge of rock, and, as they came
nearer, Alice could hear him sighing as if his heart would break. She
pitied him deeply. “What is his sorrow?” she asked the Gryphon, and the
Gryphon answered, very nearly in the same words as before, “It’s all
his fancy, that: he hasn’t got no sorrow, you know. Come on!”

So they went up to the Mock Turtle, who looked at them with large eyes
full of tears, but said nothing.

“This here young lady,” said the Gryphon, “she wants for to know your
history, she do.”

“I’ll tell it her,” said the Mock Turtle in a deep, hollow tone: “sit
down, both of you, and don’t speak a word till I’ve finished.”

So they sat down, and nobody spoke for some minutes. Alice thought to
herself, “I don’t see how he can _ever_ finish, if he doesn’t begin.”
But she waited patiently.

“Once,” said the Mock Turtle at last, with a deep sigh, “I was a real
Turtle.”

These words were followed by a very long silence, broken only by an
occasional exclamation of “Hjckrrh!” from the Gryphon, and the constant
heavy sobbing of the Mock Turtle. Alice was very nearly getting up and
saying, “Thank you, sir, for your interesting story,” but she could not
help thinking there _must_ be more to come, so she sat still and said
nothing.

“When we were little,” the Mock Turtle went on at last, more calmly,
though still sobbing a little now and then, “we went to school in the
sea. The master was an old Turtle—we used to call him Tortoise—”

“Why did you call him Tortoise, if he wasn’t one?” Alice asked.

“We called him Tortoise because he taught us,” said the Mock Turtle
angrily: “really you are very dull!”

“You ought to be ashamed of yourself for asking such a simple
question,” added the Gryphon; and then they both sat silent and looked
at poor Alice, who felt ready to sink into the earth. At last the
Gryphon said to the Mock Turtle, “Drive on, old fellow! Don’t be all
day about it!” and he went on in these words:

“Yes, we went to school in the sea, though you mayn’t believe it—”

“I never said I didn’t!” interrupted Alice.

“You did,” said the Mock Turtle.

“Hold your tongue!” added the Gryphon, before Alice could speak again.
The Mock Turtle went on.

“We had the best of educations—in fact, we went to school every day—”

“_I’ve_ been to a day-school, too,” said Alice; “you needn’t be so
proud as all that.”

“With extras?” asked the Mock Turtle a little anxiously.

“Yes,” said Alice, “we learned French and music.”

“And washing?” said the Mock Turtle.

“Certainly not!” said Alice indignantly.

“Ah! then yours wasn’t a really good school,” said the Mock Turtle in a
tone of great relief. “Now at _ours_ they had at the end of the bill,
‘French, music, _and washing_—extra.’”

“You couldn’t have wanted it much,” said Alice; “living at the bottom
of the sea.”

“I couldn’t afford to learn it.” said the Mock Turtle with a sigh. “I
only took the regular course.”

“What was that?” inquired Alice.

“Reeling and Writhing, of course, to begin with,” the Mock Turtle
replied; “and then the different branches of Arithmetic—Ambition,
Distraction, Uglification, and Derision.”

“I never heard of ‘Uglification,’” Alice ventured to say. “What is it?”

The Gryphon lifted up both its paws in surprise. “What! Never heard of
uglifying!” it exclaimed. “You know what to beautify is, I suppose?”

“Yes,” said Alice doubtfully: “it means—to—make—anything—prettier.”

“Well, then,” the Gryphon went on, “if you don’t know what to uglify
is, you _are_ a simpleton.”

Alice did not feel encouraged to ask any more questions about it, so
she turned to the Mock Turtle, and said “What else had you to learn?”

“Well, there was Mystery,” the Mock Turtle replied, counting off the
subjects on his flappers, “—Mystery, ancient and modern, with
Seaography: then Drawling—the Drawling-master was an old conger-eel,
that used to come once a week: _he_ taught us Drawling, Stretching, and
Fainting in Coils.”

“What was _that_ like?” said Alice.

“Well, I can’t show it you myself,” the Mock Turtle said: “I’m too
stiff. And the Gryphon never learnt it.”

“Hadn’t time,” said the Gryphon: “I went to the Classics master,
though. He was an old crab, _he_ was.”

“I never went to him,” the Mock Turtle said with a sigh: “he taught
Laughing and Grief, they used to say.”

“So he did, so he did,” said the Gryphon, sighing in his turn; and both
creatures hid their faces in their paws.

“And how many hours a day did you do lessons?” said Alice, in a hurry
to change the subject.

“Ten hours the first day,” said the Mock Turtle: “nine the next, and so
on.”

“What a curious plan!” exclaimed Alice.

“That’s the reason they’re called lessons,” the Gryphon remarked:
“because they lessen from day to day.”

This was quite a new idea to Alice, and she thought it over a little
before she made her next remark. “Then the eleventh day must have been
a holiday?”

“Of course it was,” said the Mock Turtle.

“And how did you manage on the twelfth?” Alice went on eagerly.

“That’s enough about lessons,” the Gryphon interrupted in a very
decided tone: “tell her something about the games now.”




CHAPTER X.
The Lobster Quadrille


The Mock Turtle sighed deeply, and drew the back of one flapper across
his eyes. He looked at Alice, and tried to speak, but for a minute or
two sobs choked his voice. “Same as if he had a bone in his throat,”
said the Gryphon: and it set to work shaking him and punching him in
the back. At last the Mock Turtle recovered his voice, and, with tears
running down his cheeks, he went on again:—

“You may not have lived much under the sea—” (“I haven’t,” said
Alice)—“and perhaps you were never even introduced to a lobster—”
(Alice began to say “I once tasted—” but checked herself hastily, and
said “No, never”) “—so you can have no idea what a delightful thing a
Lobster Quadrille is!”

“No, indeed,” said Alice. “What sort of a dance is it?”

“Why,” said the Gryphon, “you first form into a line along the
sea-shore—”

“Two lines!” cried the Mock Turtle. “Seals, turtles, salmon, and so on;
then, when you’ve cleared all the jelly-fish out of the way—”

“_That_ generally takes some time,” interrupted the Gryphon.

“—you advance twice—”

“Each with a lobster as a partner!” cried the Gryphon.

“Of course,” the Mock Turtle said: “advance twice, set to partners—”

“—change lobsters, and retire in same order,” continued the Gryphon.

“Then, you know,” the Mock Turtle went on, “you throw the—”

“The lobsters!” shouted the Gryphon, with a bound into the air.

“—as far out to sea as you can—”

“Swim after them!” screamed the Gryphon.

“Turn a somersault in the sea!” cried the Mock Turtle, capering wildly
about.

“Change lobsters again!” yelled the Gryphon at the top of its voice.

“Back to land again, and that’s all the first figure,” said the Mock
Turtle, suddenly dropping his voice; and the two creatures, who had
been jumping about like mad things all this time, sat down again very
sadly and quietly, and looked at Alice.

“It must be a very pretty dance,” said Alice timidly.

“Would you like to see a little of it?” said the Mock Turtle.

“Very much indeed,” said Alice.

“Come, let’s try the first figure!” said the Mock Turtle to the
Gryphon. “We can do without lobsters, you know. Which shall sing?”

“Oh, _you_ sing,” said the Gryphon. “I’ve forgotten the words.”

So they began solemnly dancing round and round Alice, every now and
then treading on her toes when they passed too close, and waving their
forepaws to mark the time, while the Mock Turtle sang this, very slowly
and sadly:—

“Will you walk a little faster?” said a whiting to a snail.
“There’s a porpoise close behind us, and he’s treading on my tail.
See how eagerly the lobsters and the turtles all advance!
They are waiting on the shingle—will you come and join the dance?
Will you, won’t you, will you, won’t you, will you join the dance?
Will you, won’t you, will you, won’t you, won’t you join the dance?

“You can really have no notion how delightful it will be
When they take us up and throw us, with the lobsters, out to sea!”
But the snail replied “Too far, too far!” and gave a look askance—
Said he thanked the whiting kindly, but he would not join the dance.
Would not, could not, would not, could not, would not join the dance.
Would not, could not, would not, could not, could not join the dance.

“What matters it how far we go?” his scaly friend replied.
“There is another shore, you know, upon the other side.
The further off from England the nearer is to France—
Then turn not pale, beloved snail, but come and join the dance.
Will you, won’t you, will you, won’t you, will you join the dance?
Will you, won’t you, will you, won’t you, won’t you join the dance?”


“Thank you, it’s a very interesting dance to watch,” said Alice,
feeling very glad that it was over at last: “and I do so like that
curious song about the whiting!”

“Oh, as to the whiting,” said the Mock Turtle, “they—you’ve seen them,
of course?”

“Yes,” said Alice, “I’ve often seen them at dinn—” she checked herself
hastily.

“I don’t know where Dinn may be,” said the Mock Turtle, “but if you’ve
seen them so often, of course you know what they’re like.”

“I believe so,” Alice replied thoughtfully. “They have their tails in
their mouths—and they’re all over crumbs.”

“You’re wrong about the crumbs,” said the Mock Turtle: “crumbs would
all wash off in the sea. But they _have_ their tails in their mouths;
and the reason is—” here the Mock Turtle yawned and shut his
eyes.—“Tell her about the reason and all that,” he said to the Gryphon.

“The reason is,” said the Gryphon, “that they _would_ go with the
lobsters to the dance. So they got thrown out to sea. So they had to
fall a long way. So they got their tails fast in their mouths. So they
couldn’t get them out again. That’s all.”

“Thank you,” said Alice, “it’s very interesting. I never knew so much
about a whiting before.”

“I can tell you more than that, if you like,” said the Gryphon. “Do you
know why it’s called a whiting?”

“I never thought about it,” said Alice. “Why?”

“_It does the boots and shoes_,” the Gryphon replied very solemnly.

Alice was thoroughly puzzled. “Does the boots and shoes!” she repeated
in a wondering tone.

“Why, what are _your_ shoes done with?” said the Gryphon. “I mean, what
makes them so shiny?”

Alice looked down at them, and considered a little before she gave her
answer. “They’re done with blacking, I believe.”

“Boots and shoes under the sea,” the Gryphon went on in a deep voice,
“are done with a whiting. Now you know.”

“And what are they made of?” Alice asked in a tone of great curiosity.

“Soles and eels, of course,” the Gryphon replied rather impatiently:
“any shrimp could have told you that.”

“If I’d been the whiting,” said Alice, whose thoughts were still
running on the song, “I’d have said to the porpoise, ‘Keep back,
please: we don’t want _you_ with us!’”

“They were obliged to have him with them,” the Mock Turtle said: “no
wise fish would go anywhere without a porpoise.”

“Wouldn’t it really?” said Alice in a tone of great surprise.

“Of course not,” said the Mock Turtle: “why, if a fish came to _me_,
and told me he was going a journey, I should say ‘With what porpoise?’”

“Don’t you mean ‘purpose’?” said Alice.

“I mean what I say,” the Mock Turtle replied in an offended tone. And
the Gryphon added “Come, let’s hear some of _your_ adventures.”

“I could tell you my adventures—beginning from this morning,” said
Alice a little timidly: “but it’s no use going back to yesterday,
because I was a different person then.”

“Explain all that,” said the Mock Turtle.

“No, no! The adventures first,” said the Gryphon in an impatient tone:
“explanations take such a dreadful time.”

So Alice began telling them her adventures from the time when she first
saw the White Rabbit. She was a little nervous about it just at first,
the two creatures got so close to her, one on each side, and opened
their eyes and mouths so _very_ wide, but she gained courage as she
went on. Her listeners were perfectly quiet till she got to the part
about her repeating “_You are old, Father William_,” to the
Caterpillar, and the words all coming different, and then the Mock
Turtle drew a long breath, and said “That’s very curious.”

“It’s all about as curious as it can be,” said the Gryphon.

“It all came different!” the Mock Turtle repeated thoughtfully. “I
should like to hear her try and repeat something now. Tell her to
begin.” He looked at the Gryphon as if he thought it had some kind of
authority over Alice.

“Stand up and repeat ‘’_Tis the voice of the sluggard_,’” said the
Gryphon.

“How the creatures order one about, and make one repeat lessons!”
thought Alice; “I might as well be at school at once.” However, she got
up, and began to repeat it, but her head was so full of the Lobster
Quadrille, that she hardly knew what she was saying, and the words came
very queer indeed:—

“’Tis the voice of the Lobster; I heard him declare,
“You have baked me too brown, I must sugar my hair.”
As a duck with its eyelids, so he with his nose
Trims his belt and his buttons, and turns out his toes.”

[later editions continued as follows
When the sands are all dry, he is gay as a lark,
And will talk in contemptuous tones of the Shark,
But, when the tide rises and sharks are around,
His voice has a timid and tremulous sound.]


“That’s different from what _I_ used to say when I was a child,” said
the Gryphon.

“Well, I never heard it before,” said the Mock Turtle; “but it sounds
uncommon nonsense.”

Alice said nothing; she had sat down with her face in her hands,
wondering if anything would _ever_ happen in a natural way again.

“I should like to have it explained,” said the Mock Turtle.

“She can’t explain it,” said the Gryphon hastily. “Go on with the next
verse.”

“But about his toes?” the Mock Turtle persisted. “How _could_ he turn
them out with his nose, you know?”

“It’s the first position in dancing.” Alice said; but was dreadfully
puzzled by the whole thing, and longed to change the subject.

“Go on with the next verse,” the Gryphon repeated impatiently: “it
begins ‘_I passed by his garden_.’”

Alice did not dare to disobey, though she felt sure it would all come
wrong, and she went on in a trembling voice:—

“I passed by his garden, and marked, with one eye,
How the Owl and the Panther were sharing a pie—”

[later editions continued as follows
The Panther took pie-crust, and gravy, and meat,
While the Owl had the dish as its share of the treat.
When the pie was all finished, the Owl, as a boon,
Was kindly permitted to pocket the spoon:
While the Panther received knife and fork with a growl,
And concluded the banquet—]


“What _is_ the use of repeating all that stuff,” the Mock Turtle
interrupted, “if you don’t explain it as you go on? It’s by far the
most confusing thing _I_ ever heard!”

“Yes, I think you’d better leave off,” said the Gryphon: and Alice was
only too glad to do so.

“Shall we try another figure of the Lobster Quadrille?” the Gryphon
went on. “Or would you like the Mock Turtle to sing you a song?”

“Oh, a song, please, if the Mock Turtle would be so kind,” Alice
replied, so eagerly that the Gryphon said, in a rather offended tone,
“Hm! No accounting for tastes! Sing her ‘_Turtle Soup_,’ will you, old
fellow?”

The Mock Turtle sighed deeply, and began, in a voice sometimes choked
with sobs, to sing this:—

“Beautiful Soup, so rich and green,
Waiting in a hot tureen!
Who for such dainties would not stoop?
Soup of the evening, beautiful Soup!
Soup of the evening, beautiful Soup!
    Beau—ootiful Soo—oop!
    Beau—ootiful Soo—oop!
Soo—oop of the e—e—evening,
    Beautiful, beautiful Soup!

“Beautiful Soup! Who cares for fish,
Game, or any other dish?
Who would not give all else for two p
ennyworth only of beautiful Soup?
Pennyworth only of beautiful Soup?
    Beau—ootiful Soo—oop!
    Beau—ootiful Soo—oop!
Soo—oop of the e—e—evening,
    Beautiful, beauti—FUL SOUP!”


“Chorus again!” cried the Gryphon, and the Mock Turtle had just begun
to repeat it, when a cry of “The trial’s beginning!” was heard in the
distance.

“Come on!” cried the Gryphon, and, taking Alice by the hand, it hurried
off, without waiting for the end of the song.

“What trial is it?” Alice panted as she ran; but the Gryphon only
answered “Come on!” and ran the faster, while more and more faintly
came, carried on the breeze that followed them, the melancholy words:—

“Soo—oop of the e—e—evening,
    Beautiful, beautiful Soup!”




CHAPTER XI.
Who Stole the Tarts?


The King and Queen of Hearts were seated on their throne when they
arrived, with a great crowd assembled about them—all sorts of little
birds and beasts, as well as the whole pack of cards: the Knave was
standing before them, in chains, with a soldier on each side to guard
him; and near the King was the White Rabbit, with a trumpet in one
hand, and a scroll of parchment in the other. In the very middle of the
court was a table, with a large dish of tarts upon it: they looked so
good, that it made Alice quite hungry to look at them—“I wish they’d
get the trial done,” she thought, “and hand round the refreshments!”
But there seemed to be no chance of this, so she began looking at
everything about her, to pass away the time.

Alice had never been in a court of justice before, but she had read
about them in books, and she was quite pleased to find that she knew
the name of nearly everything there. “That’s the judge,” she said to
herself, “because of his great wig.”

The judge, by the way, was the King; and as he wore his crown over the
wig, (look at the frontispiece if you want to see how he did it,) he
did not look at all comfortable, and it was certainly not becoming.

“And that’s the jury-box,” thought Alice, “and those twelve creatures,”
(she was obliged to say “creatures,” you see, because some of them were
animals, and some were birds,) “I suppose they are the jurors.” She
said this last word two or three times over to herself, being rather
proud of it: for she thought, and rightly too, that very few little
girls of her age knew the meaning of it at all. However, “jury-men”
would have done just as well.

The twelve jurors were all writing very busily on slates. “What are
they doing?” Alice whispered to the Gryphon. “They can’t have anything
to put down yet, before the trial’s begun.”

“They’re putting down their names,” the Gryphon whispered in reply,
“for fear they should forget them before the end of the trial.”

“Stupid things!” Alice began in a loud, indignant voice, but she
stopped hastily, for the White Rabbit cried out, “Silence in the
court!” and the King put on his spectacles and looked anxiously round,
to make out who was talking.

Alice could see, as well as if she were looking over their shoulders,
that all the jurors were writing down “stupid things!” on their slates,
and she could even make out that one of them didn’t know how to spell
“stupid,” and that he had to ask his neighbour to tell him. “A nice
muddle their slates’ll be in before the trial’s over!” thought Alice.

One of the jurors had a pencil that squeaked. This of course, Alice
could _not_ stand, and she went round the court and got behind him, and
very soon found an opportunity of taking it away. She did it so quickly
that the poor little juror (it was Bill, the Lizard) could not make out
at all what had become of it; so, after hunting all about for it, he
was obliged to write with one finger for the rest of the day; and this
was of very little use, as it left no mark on the slate.

“Herald, read the accusation!” said the King.

On this the White Rabbit blew three blasts on the trumpet, and then
unrolled the parchment scroll, and read as follows:—

“The Queen of Hearts, she made some tarts,
    All on a summer day:
The Knave of Hearts, he stole those tarts,
    And took them quite away!”


“Consider your verdict,” the King said to the jury.

“Not yet, not yet!” the Rabbit hastily interrupted. “There’s a great
deal to come before that!”

“Call the first witness,” said the King; and the White Rabbit blew
three blasts on the trumpet, and called out, “First witness!”

The first witness was the Hatter. He came in with a teacup in one hand
and a piece of bread-and-butter in the other. “I beg pardon, your
Majesty,” he began, “for bringing these in: but I hadn’t quite finished
my tea when I was sent for.”

“You ought to have finished,” said the King. “When did you begin?”

The Hatter looked at the March Hare, who had followed him into the
court, arm-in-arm with the Dormouse. “Fourteenth of March, I _think_ it
was,” he said.

“Fifteenth,” said the March Hare.

“Sixteenth,” added the Dormouse.

“Write that down,” the King said to the jury, and the jury eagerly
wrote down all three dates on their slates, and then added them up, and
reduced the answer to shillings and pence.

“Take off your hat,” the King said to the Hatter.

“It isn’t mine,” said the Hatter.

“_Stolen!_” the King exclaimed, turning to the jury, who instantly made
a memorandum of the fact.

“I keep them to sell,” the Hatter added as an explanation; “I’ve none
of my own. I’m a hatter.”

Here the Queen put on her spectacles, and began staring at the Hatter,
who turned pale and fidgeted.

“Give your evidence,” said the King; “and don’t be nervous, or I’ll
have you executed on the spot.”

This did not seem to encourage the witness at all: he kept shifting
from one foot to the other, looking uneasily at the Queen, and in his
confusion he bit a large piece out of his teacup instead of the
bread-and-butter.

Just at this moment Alice felt a very curious sensation, which puzzled
her a good deal until she made out what it was: she was beginning to
grow larger again, and she thought at first she would get up and leave
the court; but on second thoughts she decided to remain where she was
as long as there was room for her.

“I wish you wouldn’t squeeze so.” said the Dormouse, who was sitting
next to her. “I can hardly breathe.”

“I can’t help it,” said Alice very meekly: “I’m growing.”

“You’ve no right to grow _here_,” said the Dormouse.

“Don’t talk nonsense,” said Alice more boldly: “you know you’re growing
too.”

“Yes, but _I_ grow at a reasonable pace,” said the Dormouse: “not in
that ridiculous fashion.” And he got up very sulkily and crossed over
to the other side of the court.

All this time the Queen had never left off staring at the Hatter, and,
just as the Dormouse crossed the court, she said to one of the officers
of the court, “Bring me the list of the singers in the last concert!”
on which the wretched Hatter trembled so, that he shook both his shoes
off.

“Give your evidence,” the King repeated angrily, “or I’ll have you
executed, whether you’re nervous or not.”

“I’m a poor man, your Majesty,” the Hatter began, in a trembling voice,
“—and I hadn’t begun my tea—not above a week or so—and what with the
bread-and-butter getting so thin—and the twinkling of the tea—”

“The twinkling of the _what?_” said the King.

“It _began_ with the tea,” the Hatter replied.

“Of course twinkling begins with a T!” said the King sharply. “Do you
take me for a dunce? Go on!”

“I’m a poor man,” the Hatter went on, “and most things twinkled after
that—only the March Hare said—”

“I didn’t!” the March Hare interrupted in a great hurry.

“You did!” said the Hatter.

“I deny it!” said the March Hare.

“He denies it,” said the King: “leave out that part.”

“Well, at any rate, the Dormouse said—” the Hatter went on, looking
anxiously round to see if he would deny it too: but the Dormouse denied
nothing, being fast asleep.

“After that,” continued the Hatter, “I cut some more bread-and-butter—”

“But what did the Dormouse say?” one of the jury asked.

“That I can’t remember,” said the Hatter.

“You _must_ remember,” remarked the King, “or I’ll have you executed.”

The miserable Hatter dropped his teacup and bread-and-butter, and went
down on one knee. “I’m a poor man, your Majesty,” he began.

“You’re a _very_ poor _speaker_,” said the King.

Here one of the guinea-pigs cheered, and was immediately suppressed by
the officers of the court. (As that is rather a hard word, I will just
explain to you how it was done. They had a large canvas bag, which tied
up at the mouth with strings: into this they slipped the guinea-pig,
head first, and then sat upon it.)

“I’m glad I’ve seen that done,” thought Alice. “I’ve so often read in
the newspapers, at the end of trials, “There was some attempts at
applause, which was immediately suppressed by the officers of the
court,” and I never understood what it meant till now.”

“If that’s all you know about it, you may stand down,” continued the
King.

“I can’t go no lower,” said the Hatter: “I’m on the floor, as it is.”

“Then you may _sit_ down,” the King replied.

Here the other guinea-pig cheered, and was suppressed.

“Come, that finished the guinea-pigs!” thought Alice. “Now we shall get
on better.”

“I’d rather finish my tea,” said the Hatter, with an anxious look at
the Queen, who was reading the list of singers.

“You may go,” said the King, and the Hatter hurriedly left the court,
without even waiting to put his shoes on.

“—and just take his head off outside,” the Queen added to one of the
officers: but the Hatter was out of sight before the officer could get
to the door.

“Call the next witness!” said the King.

The next witness was the Duchess’s cook. She carried the pepper-box in
her hand, and Alice guessed who it was, even before she got into the
court, by the way the people near the door began sneezing all at once.

“Give your evidence,” said the King.

“Shan’t,” said the cook.

The King looked anxiously at the White Rabbit, who said in a low voice,
“Your Majesty must cross-examine _this_ witness.”

“Well, if I must, I must,” the King said, with a melancholy air, and,
after folding his arms and frowning at the cook till his eyes were
nearly out of sight, he said in a deep voice, “What are tarts made of?”

“Pepper, mostly,” said the cook.

“Treacle,” said a sleepy voice behind her.

“Collar that Dormouse,” the Queen shrieked out. “Behead that Dormouse!
Turn that Dormouse out of court! Suppress him! Pinch him! Off with his
whiskers!”

For some minutes the whole court was in confusion, getting the Dormouse
turned out, and, by the time they had settled down again, the cook had
disappeared.

“Never mind!” said the King, with an air of great relief. “Call the
next witness.” And he added in an undertone to the Queen, “Really, my
dear, _you_ must cross-examine the next witness. It quite makes my
forehead ache!”

Alice watched the White Rabbit as he fumbled over the list, feeling
very curious to see what the next witness would be like, “—for they
haven’t got much evidence _yet_,” she said to herself. Imagine her
surprise, when the White Rabbit read out, at the top of his shrill
little voice, the name “Alice!”




CHAPTER XII.
Alice’s Evidence


“Here!” cried Alice, quite forgetting in the flurry of the moment how
large she had grown in the last few minutes, and she jumped up in such
a hurry that she tipped over the jury-box with the edge of her skirt,
upsetting all the jurymen on to the heads of the crowd below, and there
they lay sprawling about, reminding her very much of a globe of
goldfish she had accidentally upset the week before.

“Oh, I _beg_ your pardon!” she exclaimed in a tone of great dismay, and
began picking them up again as quickly as she could, for the accident
of the goldfish kept running in her head, and she had a vague sort of
idea that they must be collected at once and put back into the
jury-box, or they would die.

“The trial cannot proceed,” said the King in a very grave voice, “until
all the jurymen are back in their proper places—_all_,” he repeated
with great emphasis, looking hard at Alice as he said so.

Alice looked at the jury-box, and saw that, in her haste, she had put
the Lizard in head downwards, and the poor little thing was waving its
tail about in a melancholy way, being quite unable to move. She soon
got it out again, and put it right; “not that it signifies much,” she
said to herself; “I should think it would be _quite_ as much use in the
trial one way up as the other.”

As soon as the jury had a little recovered from the shock of being
upset, and their slates and pencils had been found and handed back to
them, they set to work very diligently to write out a history of the
accident, all except the Lizard, who seemed too much overcome to do
anything but sit with its mouth open, gazing up into the roof of the
court.

“What do you know about this business?” the King said to Alice.

“Nothing,” said Alice.

“Nothing _whatever?_” persisted the King.

“Nothing whatever,” said Alice.

“That’s very important,” the King said, turning to the jury. They were
just beginning to write this down on their slates, when the White
Rabbit interrupted: “_Un_important, your Majesty means, of course,” he
said in a very respectful tone, but frowning and making faces at him as
he spoke.

“_Un_important, of course, I meant,” the King hastily said, and went on
to himself in an undertone,

“important—unimportant—unimportant—important—” as if he were trying
which word sounded best.

Some of the jury wrote it down “important,” and some “unimportant.”
Alice could see this, as she was near enough to look over their slates;
“but it doesn’t matter a bit,” she thought to herself.

At this moment the King, who had been for some time busily writing in
his note-book, cackled out “Silence!” and read out from his book, “Rule
Forty-two. _All persons more than a mile high to leave the court_.”

Everybody looked at Alice.

“_I’m_ not a mile high,” said Alice.

“You are,” said the King.

“Nearly two miles high,” added the Queen.

“Well, I shan’t go, at any rate,” said Alice: “besides, that’s not a
regular rule: you invented it just now.”

“It’s the oldest rule in the book,” said the King.

“Then it ought to be Number One,” said Alice.

The King turned pale, and shut his note-book hastily. “Consider your
verdict,” he said to the jury, in a low, trembling voice.

“There’s more evidence to come yet, please your Majesty,” said the
White Rabbit, jumping up in a great hurry; “this paper has just been
picked up.”

“What’s in it?” said the Queen.

“I haven’t opened it yet,” said the White Rabbit, “but it seems to be a
letter, written by the prisoner to—to somebody.”

“It must have been that,” said the King, “unless it was written to
nobody, which isn’t usual, you know.”

“Who is it directed to?” said one of the jurymen.

“It isn’t directed at all,” said the White Rabbit; “in fact, there’s
nothing written on the _outside_.” He unfolded the paper as he spoke,
and added “It isn’t a letter, after all: it’s a set of verses.”

“Are they in the prisoner’s handwriting?” asked another of the jurymen.

“No, they’re not,” said the White Rabbit, “and that’s the queerest
thing about it.” (The jury all looked puzzled.)

“He must have imitated somebody else’s hand,” said the King. (The jury
all brightened up again.)

“Please your Majesty,” said the Knave, “I didn’t write it, and they
can’t prove I did: there’s no name signed at the end.”

“If you didn’t sign it,” said the King, “that only makes the matter
worse. You _must_ have meant some mischief, or else you’d have signed
your name like an honest man.”

There was a general clapping of hands at this: it was the first really
clever thing the King had said that day.

“That _proves_ his guilt,” said the Queen.

“It proves nothing of the sort!” said Alice. “Why, you don’t even know
what they’re about!”

“Read them,” said the King.

The White Rabbit put on his spectacles. “Where shall I begin, please
your Majesty?” he asked.

“Begin at the beginning,” the King said gravely, “and go on till you
come to the end: then stop.”

These were the verses the White Rabbit read:—

“They told me you had been to her,
    And mentioned me to him:
She gave me a good character,
    But said I could not swim.

He sent them word I had not gone
    (We know it to be true):
If she should push the matter on,
    What would become of you?

I gave her one, they gave him two,
    You gave us three or more;
They all returned from him to you,
    Though they were mine before.

If I or she should chance to be
    Involved in this affair,
He trusts to you to set them free,
    Exactly as we were.

My notion was that you had been
    (Before she had this fit)
An obstacle that came between
    Him, and ourselves, and it.

Don’t let him know she liked them best,
    For this must ever be
A secret, kept from all the rest,
    Between yourself and me.”


“That’s the most important piece of evidence we’ve heard yet,” said the
King, rubbing his hands; “so now let the jury—”

“If any one of them can explain it,” said Alice, (she had grown so
large in the last few minutes that she wasn’t a bit afraid of
interrupting him,) “I’ll give him sixpence. _I_ don’t believe there’s
an atom of meaning in it.”

The jury all wrote down on their slates, “_She_ doesn’t believe there’s
an atom of meaning in it,” but none of them attempted to explain the
paper.

“If there’s no meaning in it,” said the King, “that saves a world of
trouble, you know, as we needn’t try to find any. And yet I don’t
know,” he went on, spreading out the verses on his knee, and looking at
them with one eye; “I seem to see some meaning in them, after all.
“—_said I could not swim_—” you can’t swim, can you?” he added, turning
to the Knave.

The Knave shook his head sadly. “Do I look like it?” he said. (Which he
certainly did _not_, being made entirely of cardboard.)

“All right, so far,” said the King, and he went on muttering over the
verses to himself: “‘_We know it to be true_—’ that’s the jury, of
course—‘_I gave her one, they gave him two_—’ why, that must be what he
did with the tarts, you know—”

“But, it goes on ‘_they all returned from him to you_,’” said Alice.

“Why, there they are!” said the King triumphantly, pointing to the
tarts on the table. “Nothing can be clearer than _that_. Then
again—‘_before she had this fit_—’ you never had fits, my dear, I
think?” he said to the Queen.

“Never!” said the Queen furiously, throwing an inkstand at the Lizard
as she spoke. (The unfortunate little Bill had left off writing on his
slate with one finger, as he found it made no mark; but he now hastily
began again, using the ink, that was trickling down his face, as long
as it lasted.)

“Then the words don’t _fit_ you,” said the King, looking round the
court with a smile. There was a dead silence.

“It’s a pun!” the King added in an offended tone, and everybody
laughed, “Let the jury consider their verdict,” the King said, for
about the twentieth time that day.

“No, no!” said the Queen. “Sentence first—verdict afterwards.”

“Stuff and nonsense!” said Alice loudly. “The idea of having the
sentence first!”

“Hold your tongue!” said the Queen, turning purple.

“I won’t!” said Alice.

“Off with her head!” the Queen shouted at the top of her voice. Nobody
moved.

“Who cares for you?” said Alice, (she had grown to her full size by
this time.) “You’re nothing but a pack of cards!”

At this the whole pack rose up into the air, and came flying down upon
her: she gave a little scream, half of fright and half of anger, and
tried to beat them off, and found herself lying on the bank, with her
head in the lap of her sister, who was gently brushing away some dead
leaves that had fluttered down from the trees upon her face.

“Wake up, Alice dear!” said her sister; “Why, what a long sleep you’ve
had!”

“Oh, I’ve had such a curious dream!” said Alice, and she told her
sister, as well as she could remember them, all these strange
Adventures of hers that you have just been reading about; and when she
had finished, her sister kissed her, and said, “It _was_ a curious
dream, dear, certainly: but now run in to your tea; it’s getting late.”
So Alice got up and ran off, thinking while she ran, as well she might,
what a wonderful dream it had been.


But her sister sat still just as she left her, leaning her head on her
hand, watching the setting sun, and thinking of little Alice and all
her wonderful Adventures, till she too began dreaming after a fashion,
and this was her dream:—

First, she dreamed of little Alice herself, and once again the tiny
hands were clasped upon her knee, and the bright eager eyes were
looking up into hers—she could hear the very tones of her voice, and
see that queer little toss of her head to keep back the wandering hair
that _would_ always get into her eyes—and still as she listened, or
seemed to listen, the whole place around her became alive with the
strange creatures of her little sister’s dream.

The long grass rustled at her feet as the White Rabbit hurried by—the
frightened Mouse splashed his way through the neighbouring pool—she
could hear the rattle of the teacups as the March Hare and his friends
shared their never-ending meal, and the shrill voice of the Queen
ordering off her unfortunate guests to execution—once more the pig-baby
was sneezing on the Duchess’s knee, while plates and dishes crashed
around it—once more the shriek of the Gryphon, the squeaking of the
Lizard’s slate-pencil, and the choking of the suppressed guinea-pigs,
filled the air, mixed up with the distant sobs of the miserable Mock
Turtle.

So she sat on, with closed eyes, and half believed herself in
Wonderland, though she knew she had but to open them again, and all
would change to dull reality—the grass would be only rustling in the
wind, and the pool rippling to the waving of the reeds—the rattling
teacups would change to tinkling sheep-bells, and the Queen’s shrill
cries to the voice of the shepherd boy—and the sneeze of the baby, the
shriek of the Gryphon, and all the other queer noises, would change
(she knew) to the confused clamour of the busy farm-yard—while the
lowing of the cattle in the distance would take the place of the Mock
Turtle’s heavy sobs.

Lastly, she pictured to herself how this same little sister of hers
would, in the after-time, be herself a grown woman; and how she would
keep, through all her riper years, the simple and loving heart of her
childhood: and how she would gather about her other little children,
and make _their_ eyes bright and eager with many a strange tale,
perhaps even with the dream of Wonderland of long ago: and how she
would feel with all their simple sorrows, and find a pleasure in all
their simple joys, remembering her own child-life, and the happy summer
days.

THE END                                         "TITANIC"

                                      Screenplay by

                                      James Cameron

                

               BLACKNESS

               Then two faint lights appear, close together... growing 
               brighter. They resolve into two DEEP SUBMERSIBLES, free-
               falling toward us like express elevators.

               One is ahead of the other, and passes close enough to FILL 
               FRAME, looking like a spacecraft blazing with lights, 
               bristling with insectile manipulators.

               TILTING DOWN to follow it as it descends away into the 
               limitless blackness below. Soon they are fireflies, then 
               stars. Then gone.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. / INT. MIR ONE / NORTH ATLANTIC DEEP

               PUSHING IN on one of the falling submersibles, called MIR 
               ONE, right up to its circular viewport to see the occupants.

               INSIDE, it is a cramped seven foot sphere, crammed with 
               equipment. ANATOLY MIKAILAVICH, the sub's pilot, sits hunched 
               over his controls... singing softly in Russian.

               Next to him on one side is BROCK LOVETT. He's in his late 
               forties, deeply tanned, and likes to wear his Nomex suit 
               unzipped to show the gold from famous shipwrecks covering 
               his gray chest hair. He is a wiley, fast-talking treasure 
               hunter, a salvage superstar who is part historian, part 
               adventurer and part vacuum cleaner salesman. Right now, he 
               is propped against the CO2 scrubber, fast asleep and snoring.

               On the other side, crammed into the remaining space is a 
               bearded wide-body named LEWIS BODINE, who is also asleep. 
               Lewis is an R.O.V. (REMOTELY OPERATED VEHICLE) pilot and is 
               the resident Titanic expert.

               Anatoly glances at the bottom sonar and makes a ballast 
               adjustment.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. THE BOTTOM OF THE SEA

               A pale, dead-flat lunar landscape. It gets brighter, lit 
               from above, as MIR ONE enters FRAME and drops to the seafloor 
               in a downblast from its thrusters. It hits bottom after its 
               two hour free-fall with a loud BONK.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. MIR ONE

               Lovett and Bodine jerk awake at the landing.

                                     ANATOLY
                              (heavy Russian accent)
                         We are here.

               EXT. / INT. MIR ONE AND TWO

               MINUTES LATER: THE TWO SUBS

               Skim over the seafloor to the sound of sidescan sonar and 
               the THRUM of big thrusters.

               The featureless gray clay of the bottom unrolls in the lights 
               of the subs. Bodine is watching the sidescan sonar display, 
               where the outline of a huge pointed object is visible. Anatoly 
               lies prone, driving the sub, his face pressed to the center 
               port.

                                     BODINE
                         Come left a little. She's right in 
                         front of us, eighteen meters. Fifteen. 
                         Thirteen... you should see it.

                                     ANATOLY
                         Do you see it? I don't see it... 
                         there!

               Out of the darkness, like a ghostly apparition, the bow of 
               the ship appears. Its knife-edge prow is coming straight at 
               us, seeming to plow the bottom sediment like ocean waves. It 
               towers above the seafloor, standing just as it landed 84 
               years ago.

               THE TITANIC

               Or what is left of her. Mir One goes up and over the bow 
               railing, intact except for an overgrowth of "rusticles" 
               draping it like mutated Spanish moss.

               TIGHT ON THE EYEPIECE MONITOR of a video camcorder. Brock 
               Lovett's face fills the BLACK AND WHITE FRAME.

                                     LOVETT
                         It still gets me every time.

               The image pans to the front viewport, looking over Anatoly's 
               shoulder, to the bow railing visible in the lights beyond. 
               Anatoly turns.

                                     ANATOLY
                         Is just your guilt because of stealing 
                         from the dead.

               CUT WIDER

               To show that Brock is operating the camera himself, turning 
               it in his hand so it points at his own face.

                                     LOVETT
                         Thanks, Tolya. Work with me, here.

               Brock resumes his serious, pensive gaze out the front port, 
               with the camera aimed at himself at arm's length.

                                     LOVETT
                         It still gets me every time... to 
                         see the sad ruin of the great ship 
                         sitting here, where she landed at 
                         2:30 in the morning, April 15, 1912, 
                         after her long fall from the world 
                         above.

               Anatoly rolls his eyes and mutters in Russian. Bodine chuckles 
               and watches the sonar.

                                     BODINE
                         You are so full of shit, boss.

               Mir Two drives aft down the starboard side, past the huge 
               anchor while Mir One passes over the seemingly endless 
               forecastle deck, with its massive anchor chains still laid 
               out in two neat rows, its bronze windlass caps gleaming. The 
               22 foot long subs are like white bugs next to the enormous 
               wreck.

                                     LOVETT (V.O.)
                         Dive nine. Here we are again on the 
                         deck of Titanic... two and a half 
                         miles down. The pressure is three 
                         tons per square inch, enough to crush 
                         us like a freight train going over 
                         an ant if our hull fails. These 
                         windows are nine inches thick and if 
                         they go, it's sayonara in two 
                         microseconds.

               Mir Two lands on the boat deck, next to the ruins of the 
               Officer's Quarters. Mir One lands on the roof of the deck 
               hous nearby.

                                     LOVETT
                         Right. Let's go to work.

               Bodine slips on a pair of 3-D electronic goggles, and grabs 
               the joystick controls of the ROV.

               OUTSIDE THE SUB, the ROV, a small orange and black robot 
               called SNOOP DOG, lifts from its cradle and flies forward.

                                     BODINE (V.O.)
                         Walkin' the dog.

               Snoop Dog drives itself away from the sub, paying out its 
               umbilical behind it like a robot yo-yo. Its twin stereo-video 
               cameras swivel like insect eyes. The ROV descends through an 
               open shaft that once was the beautiful First Class Grand 
               Staircase.

               Snoop Dog goes down several decks, then moves laterally into 
               the First Class Reception Room.

               SNOOP'S VIDEO POV

               Moving through the cavernous interior. The remains of the 
               ornate handcarved woodwork which gave the ship its elegance 
               move through the floodlights, the lines blurred by slow 
               dissolution and descending rusticle formations. Stalactites 
               of rust hang down so that at times it looks like a natural 
               grotto, then the scene shifts and the lines of a ghostly 
               undersea mansion can be seen again.

               MONTAGE STYLE

               As Snoop passes the ghostly images of Titanic's opulence:

               A grand piano in amazingly good shape, crashed on its side 
               against a wall. The keys gleam black and white in the lights.

               A chandelier, still hanging from the ceiling by its wire... 
               glinting as Snoop moves around it.

               Its lights play across the floor, revealing a champagne 
               bottle, then some WHITE STAR LINE china... a woman's high-
               top "granny shoe". Then something eerie: what looks like a 
               child's skull resolves into the porcelain head of a doll.

               Snoop enters a corridor which is much better preserved. Here 
               and there a door still hangs on its rusted hinges. An ornate 
               piece of molding, a wall sconce... hint at the grandeur of 
               the past.

               THE ROV

               Turns and goes through a black doorway, entering room B-52, 
               the sitting room of a "promenade suite", one of the most 
               luxurious staterooms on Titanic.

                                     BODINE
                         I'm in the sitting room. Heading for 
                         bedroom B-54.

                                     LOVETT
                         Stay off the floor. Don't stir it up 
                         like you did yesterday.

                                     BODINE
                         I'm tryin' boss.

               Glinting in the lights are the brass fixtures of the near-
               perfectly preserved fireplace. An albino Galathea crab crawls 
               over it. Nearby are the remains of a divan and a writing 
               desk. The Dog crosses the ruins of the once elegant room 
               toward another DOOR. It squeezes through the doorframe, 
               scraping rust and wood chunks loose on both sides. It moves 
               out of a cloud of rust and keeps on going.

                                     BODINE
                         I'm crossing the bedroom.

               The remains of a pillared canopy bed. Broken chairs, a 
               dresser. Through the collapsed wall of the bathroom, the 
               porcelain commode and bathtub took almost new, gleaming in 
               the dark.

                                     LOVETT
                         Okay, I want to see what's under 
                         that wardrobe door.

               SEVERAL ANGLES

               As the ROV deploys its MANIPULATOR ARMS and starts moving 
               debris aside. A lamp is lifted, its ceramic colors as bright 
               as they were in 1912.

                                     LOVETT
                         Easy, Lewis. Take it slow.

               Lewis grips a wardrobe door, lying at an angle in a corner, 
               and pulls it with Snoop's gripper. It moves reluctantly in a 
               cloud of silt. Under it is a dark object. The silt clears 
               and Snoop's cameras show them what was under the door...

                                     BODINE
                         Ooohh daddy-oh, are you seein' what 
                         I'm seein'?

               CLOSE ON LOVETT

               Watching his monitors. By his expression it is like he is 
               seeing the Holy Grail.

                                     LOVETT
                         Oh baby baby baby.
                              (grabs the mike)
                         It's payday, boys.

               ON THE SCREEN

               In the glare of the lights, is the object of their quest: a 
               small STEEL COMBINATION SAFE.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. STERN OF DECK OF KELDYSH - DAY

               THE SAFE, dripping wet in the afternoon sun, is lowered onto 
               the deck of a ship by a winch cable.

               We are on the Russian research vessel AKADEMIK MISTISLAV 
               KELDYSH. A crowd has gathered, including most of the crew of 
               Keldysh, the sub crews, and a hand-wringing money guy named 
               BOBBY BUELL who represents the limited partners. There is 
               also a documentary video crew, hired by Lovett to cover his 
               moment of glory.

               Everyone crowds around the safe. In the background Mir Two 
               is being lowered into its cradle on deck by a massive 
               hydraulic arm. Mir One is already recovered with Lewis Bodine 
               following Brock Lovett as he bounds over to the safe like a 
               kid on Christmas morning.

                                     BODINE
                         Who's the best? Say it.

                                     LOVETT
                         You are, Lewis.
                              (to the video crew)
                         You rolling?

                                     CAMERAMAN
                         Rolling.

               Brock nods to his technicians, and they set about drilling 
               the safe's hinges. During this operation, Brock amps the 
               suspense, working the lens to fill the time.

                                     LOVETT
                         Well, here it is, the moment of truth. 
                         Here's where we find out if the time, 
                         the sweat, the money spent to charter 
                         this ship and these subs, to come 
                         out here to the middle of the North 
                         Atlantic... were worth it. If what 
                         we think is in that same... is in 
                         that safe... it will be.

               Lovett grins wolfishly in anticipation of his greatest find 
               yet. The door is pried loose. It clangs onto the deck. Lovett 
               moves closer, peering into the safe's wet interior. A long 
               moment then... his face says it all.

                                     LOVETT
                         Shit.

                                     BODINE
                         You know, boss, this happened to 
                         Geraldo and his career never 
                         recovered.

                                     LOVETT
                              (to the video cameraman)
                         Get that outta my face.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. LAB DECK, PRESERVATION ROOM - DAY

               Technicians are carefully removing some papers from the safe 
               and placing them in a tray of water to separate them safely. 
               Nearby, other artifacts from the stateroom are being washed 
               and preserved.

               Buell is on the satellite phone with the INVESTORS. Lovett 
               is yelling at the video crew.

                                     LOVETT
                         You send out what I tell you when I 
                         tell you. I'm signing your paychecks, 
                         not 60 minutes. Now get set up for 
                         the uplink.

               Buell covers the phone and turns to Lovett.

                                     BUELL
                         The partners want to know how it's 
                         going?

                                     LOVETT
                         How it's going? It's going like a 
                         first date in prison, whattaya think?!

               Lovett grabs the phone from Buell and goes instantly smooth.

                                     LOVETT
                         Hi, Dave? Barry? Look, it wasn't in 
                         the safe... no, look, don't worry 
                         about it, there're still plenty of 
                         places it could be... in the floor 
                         debris in the suite, in the mother's 
                         room, in the purser's safe on C 
                         deck...
                              (seeing something)
                         Hang on a second.

               A tech coaxes some letters in the water tray to one side 
               with a tong... revealing a pencil (conte crayon) drawing of 
               a woman.

               Brock looks closely at the drawing, which is in excellent 
               shape, though its edges have partially disintegrated. The 
               woman is beautiful, and beautifully rendered. In her late 
               teens or early twenties, she is nude, though posed with a 
               kind of casual modesty. She is on an Empire divan, in a pool 
               of light that seems to radiate outward from her eyes. Scrawled 
               in the lower right corner is the date: April 14 1912. And 
               the initials JD.

               The girl is not entirely nude. At her throat is a diamond 
               necklace with one large stone hanging in the center.

               Lovett grabs a reference photo from the clutter on the lab 
               table. It is a period black-and-white photo of a diamond 
               necklace on a black velvet jeweler's display stand. He holds 
               it next to the drawing. It is clearly the same piece... a 
               complex setting with a massive central stone which is almost 
               heart-shaped.

                                     LOVETT
                         I'll be God damned.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INSERT

               A CNN NEWS STORY: a live satellite feed from the deck of the 
               Keldysh, intercut with the CNN studio.

                                     ANNOUNCER
                         Treasure hunter Brock Lovett is best 
                         known for finding Spanish gold in 
                         sunken galleons in the Caribbean. 
                         Now he is using deep submergence 
                         technology to work two and a half 
                         miles down at another famous wreck... 
                         the Titanic. He is with us live via 
                         satellite from a Russian research 
                         ship in the middle of the Atlantic... 
                         hello Brock?

                                     LOVETT
                         Yes, hi, Tracy. You know, Titanic is 
                         not just A shipwreck, Titanic is THE 
                         shipwreck. It's the Mount Everest of 
                         shipwrecks.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. HOUSE / CERAMICS STUDIO

               PULL BACK from the screen, showing the CNN report playing on 
               a TV set in the living room of a small rustic house. It is 
               full of ceramics, figurines, folk art, the walls crammed 
               with drawings and paintings... things collected over a 
               lifetime.

               PANNING to show a glassed-in studio attached to the house. 
               Outside it is a quiet morning in Ojai, California. In the 
               studio, amid incredible clutter, an ANCIENT WOMAN is throwing 
               a pot on a potter's wheel. The liquid red clay covers her 
               hands... hands that are gnarled and age-spotted, but still 
               surprisingly strong and supple. A woman in her early forties 
               assists her.

                                     LOVETT (V.O.)
                         I've planned this expedition for 
                         three years, and we're out here 
                         recovering some amazing things... 
                         things that will have enormous 
                         historical and educational value.

                                     CNN REPORTER (V.O.)
                         But it's no secret that education is 
                         not your main purpose. You're a 
                         treasure hunter. So what is the 
                         treasure you're hunting?

                                     LOVETT (V.O.)
                         I'd rather show you than tell you, 
                         and we think we're very close to 
                         doing just that.

               The old woman's name is ROSE CALVERT. Her face is a wrinkled 
               mass, her body shapeless and shrunken under a one-piece 
               African-print dress.

               But her eyes are just as bright and alive as those of a young 
               girl.

               Rose gets up and walks into the living room, wiping pottery 
               clay from her hands with a rag. A Pomeranian dog gets up and 
               comes in with her.

               The younger woman, LIZZY CALVERT, rushes to help her.

                                     ROSE
                         Turn that up please, dear.

                                     REPORTER (V.O.)
                         Your expedition is at the center of 
                         a storm of controversy over salvage 
                         rights and even ethics. Many are 
                         calling you a grave robber.

               TIGHT ON THE SCREEN

                                     LOVETT
                         Nobody called the recovery of the 
                         artifacts from King Tut's tomb grave 
                         robbing. I have museum-trained experts 
                         here, making sure this stuff is 
                         preserved and catalogued properly. 
                         Look at this drawing, which was found 
                         today...

               The video camera pans off Brock to the drawing, in a tray of 
               water. The image of the woman with the necklace FILLS FRAME.

                                     LOVETT
                         ...a piece of paper that's been 
                         underwater for 84 years... and my 
                         team are able to preserve it intact. 
                         Should this have remained unseen at 
                         the bottom of the ocean for eternity, 
                         when we can see it and enjoy it 
                         now...?

               ROSE is galvanized by this image. Her mouth hangs open in 
               amazement.

                                     ROSE
                         I'll be God damned.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. KELDYSH DECK - NIGHT

               The Mir subs are being launched. Mir Two is already in the 
               water, and Lovett is getting ready to climb into Mir One 
               when Bobby Buell runs up to him.

                                     BUELL
                         There's a satellite call for you.

                                     LOVETT
                         Bobby, we're launching. See these 
                         submersibles here, going in the water? 
                         Take a message.

                                     BUELL
                         No, trust me, you want to take this 
                         call.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. LAB DECK / KELDYSH - NIGHT

               Buell hands Lovett the phone, pushing down the blinking line. 
               The call is from Rose and we see both ends of the 
               conversation. She is in her kitchen with a mystified Lizzy.

                                     LOVETT
                         This is Brock Lovett. What can I do 
                         for you, Mrs...?

                                     BUELL
                         Rose Calvert.

                                     LOVETT
                         ...Mrs. Calvert?

                                     ROSE
                         I was just wondering if you had found 
                         the "Heart of the Ocean" yet, Mr. 
                         Lovett.

               Brock almost drops the phone. Bobby sees his shocked 
               expression...

                                     BUELL
                         I told you you wanted to take this 
                         call.

                                     LOVETT
                              (to Rose)
                         Alright. You have my attention, Rose. 
                         Can you tell me who the woman in the 
                         picture is?

                                     ROSE
                         Oh yes. The woman in the picture is 
                         me.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. OCEAN - DAY

               SMASH CUT TO AN ENORMOUS SEA STALLION HELICOPTER thundering 
               across the ocean. PAN 180 degrees as it roars past. There is 
               no land at either horizon. The Keldysh is visible in the 
               distance.

               CLOSE ON A WINDOW

               Of the monster helicopter. Rose's face is visible, looking 
               out calmly.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. KELDYSH - DAY

               Brock and Bodine are watching Mir 2 being swung over the 
               side to start a dive.

                                     BODINE
                         She's a goddamned liar! A nutcase. 
                         Like that... what's her name? That 
                         Anastasia babe.

                                     BUELL
                         They're inbound.

               Brock nods and the three of them head forward to meet the 
               approaching helo.

                                     BODINE
                         She says she's Rose DeWitt Bukater, 
                         right? Rose DeWitt Bukater died on 
                         the Titanic. At the age of 17. If 
                         she'd've lived, she'd be over a 
                         hundred now.

                                     LOVETT
                         A hundred and one next month.

                                     BODINE
                         Okay, so she's a very old goddamned 
                         liar. I traced her as far back as 
                         the 20's... she was working as an 
                         actress in L.A. An actress. Her name 
                         was Rose Dawson. Then she married a 
                         guy named Calvert, moved to Cedar 
                         Rapids, had two kids. Now Calvert's 
                         dead, and from what I've heard Cedar 
                         Rapids is dead.

               The Sea Stallion approaches the ship, BG, forcing Brock to 
               yell over the rotors.

                                     LOVETT
                         And everybody who knows about the 
                         diamond is supposed to be dead... or 
                         on this ship. But she knows about 
                         it. And I want to hear what she has 
                         to say. Got it?

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. KELDYSH HELIPAD

               IN A THUNDERING DOWNBLAST the helicopter's wheels bounce 
               down on the helipad.

               Lovett, Buell and Bodine watch as the HELICOPTER CREW CHIEF 
               hands out about ten suitcases, and then Rose is lowered to 
               the deck in a wheelchair by Keldysh crewmen. Lizzy, ducking 
               unnecessarily under the rotor, follows her out, carrying 
               FREDDY the Pomeranian. The crew chief hands a puzzled Keldysh 
               crewmember a goldfish bowl with several fish in it. Rose 
               does not travel light.

               HOLD ON the incongruous image of this little old lady, looking 
               impossibly fragile amongst all the high tech gear, grungy 
               deck crew and gigantic equipment.

                                     BODINE
                         S'cuse me, I have to go check our 
                         supply of Depends.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. ROSE'S STATEROOM / KELDYSH - DAY

               Lizzy is unpacking Rose's things in the small utilitarian 
               room. Rose is placing a number of FRAMED PHOTOS on the bureau, 
               arranging them carefully next to the fishbowl. Brock and 
               Bodine are in the doorway.

                                     LOVETT
                         Is your stateroom alright?

                                     ROSE
                         Yes. Very nice. Have you met my 
                         granddaughter, Lizzy? She takes care 
                         of me.

                                     LIZZY
                         Yes. We met just a few minutes ago, 
                         grandma. Remember, up on deck?

                                     ROSE
                         Oh, yes.

               Brock glances at Bodine... oh oh. Bodine rolls his eyes. 
               Rose finishes arranging her photographs. We get a general 
               glimpse of them: the usual snapshots... children and 
               grandchildren, her late husband.

                                     ROSE
                         There, that's nice. I have to have 
                         my pictures when I travel. And Freddy 
                         of course.
                              (to the Pomeranian)
                         Isn't that right, sweetie.

                                     LOVETT
                         Would you like anything?

                                     ROSE
                         I should like to see my drawing.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. LAB DECK, PRESERVATION AREA

               Rose looks at the drawing in its tray of water, confronting 
               herself across a span of 84 years. Until they can figure out 
               the best way to preserve it, they have to keep it immersed. 
               It sways and ripples, almost as if alive.

               TIGHT ON Rose's ancient eyes, gazing at the drawing.

               FLASHCUT of a man's hand, holding a conte crayon deftly 
               creating a shoulder and the shape of her hair with two 
               efficient lines.

               THE WOMAN'S FACE IN THE DRAWING

               Dancing under the water.

               FLASHCUT of a man's eyes, just visible over the top of a 
               sketching pad. They look up suddenly right into the LENS. 
               Soft eyes, but fearlessly direct.

               Rose smiles, remembering. Brock has the reference photo of 
               the necklace in his hand.

                                     LOVETT
                         Louis the Sixteenth wore a fabulous 
                         stone, called the Blue Diamond of 
                         the Crown, which disappeared in 1792, 
                         about the time Louis lost everything 
                         from the neck up. The theory goes 
                         that the crown diamond was chopped 
                         too... recut into a heart-like 
                         shape... and it became Le Coeur de 
                         la Mer. The Heart of the Ocean. Today 
                         it would be worth more than the Hope 
                         Diamond.

                                     ROSE
                         It was a dreadful, heavy thing.
                              (she points at the 
                              drawing)
                         I only wore it this once.

                                     LIZZY
                         You actually believe this is you, 
                         grandma?

                                     ROSE
                         It is me, dear. Wasn't I a hot number?

                                     LOVETT
                         I tracked it down through insurance 
                         records... and old claim that was 
                         settled under terms of absolute 
                         secrecy. Do you know who the claiment 
                         was, Rose?

                                     ROSE
                         Someone named Hockley, I should 
                         imagine.

                                     LOVETT
                         Nathan Hockley, right. Pittsburgh 
                         steel tycoon. For a diamond necklace 
                         his son Caledon Hockley bought in 
                         France for his fiancee... you... a 
                         week before he sailed on Titanic. 
                         And the claim was filed right after 
                         the sinking. So the diamond had to've 
                         gone down with the ship.
                              (to Lizzy)
                         See the date?

                                     LIZZY
                         April 14, 1912.

                                     LOVETT
                         If your grandma is who she says she 
                         is, she was wearing the diamond the 
                         day Titanic sank.
                              (to Rose)
                         And that makes you my new best friend. 
                         I will happily compensate you for 
                         anything you can tell us that will 
                         lead to its recovery.

                                     ROSE
                         I don't want your money, Mr. Lovett. 
                         I know how hard it is for people who 
                         care greatly for money to give some 
                         away.

                                     BODINE
                              (skeptical)
                         You don't want anything?

                                     ROSE
                              (indicating the drawing)
                         You may give me this, if anything I 
                         tell you is of value.

                                     LOVETT
                         Deal.
                              (crossing the room)
                         Over here are a few things we've 
                         recovered from your staterooms.

               Laid out on a worktable are fifty or so objects, from mundane 
               to valuable. Rose, shrunken in her chair, can barely see 
               over the table top. With a trembling hand she lifts a tortoise 
               shell hand mirror, inlaid with mother of pearl. She caresses 
               it wonderingly.

                                     ROSE
                         This was mine. How extraordinary! It 
                         looks the same as the last time I 
                         saw it.

               She turns the mirror over and looks at her ancient face in 
               the cracked glass.

                                     ROSE
                         The reflection has changed a bit.

               She spies something else, a silver and moonstone art-nouveau 
               brooch.

                                     ROSE
                         My mother's brooch. She wanted to go 
                         back for it. Caused quite a fuss.

               Rose picks up an ornate art-nouveau HAIR COMB. A jade 
               butterfly takes flight on the ebony handle of the comb. She 
               turns it slowly, remembering. We can see that Rose is 
               experiencing a rush of images and emotions that have lain 
               dormant for eight decades as she handles the butterfly comb.

                                     LOVETT
                         Are you ready to go back to Titanic?

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. IMAGING SHACK / KELDYSH

               It is a darkened room lined with TV monitors. IMAGES OF THE 
               WRECK fill the screens, fed from Mir One and Two, and the 
               two ROVs, Snoop Dog and DUNCAN.

                                     BODINE
                         Live from 12,000 feet.

               Rose stares raptly at the screens. She is enthralled by one 
               in particular, an image of the bow railing. It obviously 
               means something to her. Brock is studying her reactions 
               carefully.

                                     BODINE
                         The bow's stuck in the bottom like 
                         an axe, from the impact. Here... I 
                         can run a simulation we worked up on 
                         this monitor over here.

               Lizzy turns the chair so Rose can see the screen of Bodine's 
               computer. As he is calling up the file, he keeps talking.

                                     BODINE
                         We've put together the world's largest 
                         database on the Titanic. Okay, here...

                                     LOVETT
                         Rose might not want to see this, 
                         Lewis.

                                     ROSE
                         No, no. It's fine. I'm curious.

               Bodine starts a COMPUTER ANIMATED GRAPHIC on the screen, 
               which parallels his rapid-fire narration.

                                     BODINE
                         She hits the berg on the starboard 
                         side and it sort of bumps along... 
                         punching holes like a morse code... 
                         dit dit dit, down the side. Now she's 
                         flooding in the

                                     BODINE
                         forward compartments... and the water 
                         spills over the tops of the bulkheads, 
                         going aft. As her bow is going down, 
                         her stern is coming up... slow at 
                         first... and then faster and faster 
                         until it's lifting all that weight, 
                         maybe 20 or 30 thousand tons... out 
                         of the water and the hull can't 
                         deal... so SKRTTT!!
                              (making a sound in 
                              time with the 
                              animation)
                         ...it splits! Right down to the keel, 
                         which acts like a big hinge. Now the 
                         bow swings down and the stern falls 
                         back level... but the weight of the 
                         bow pulls the stern up vertical, and 
                         then the bow section detaches, heading 
                         for the bottom. The stern bobs like 
                         a cork, floods and goes under about 
                         2:20 a.m. Two hours and forty minutes 
                         after the collision.

               The animation then follows the bow section as it sinks. Rose 
               watches this clinical dissection of the disaster without 
               emotion.

                                     BODINE
                         The bow pulls out of its dive and 
                         planes away, almost a half a mile, 
                         before it hits the bottom going maybe 
                         12 miles an hour. KABOOM!

               The bow impacts, digging deeply into the bottom, the animation 
               now follows the stern.

                                     BODINE
                         The stern implodes as it sinks, from 
                         the pressure, and rips apart from 
                         the force of the current as it falls, 
                         landing like a big pile of junk.
                              (indicating the 
                              simulation)
                         Cool huh?

                                     ROSE
                         Thank you for that fine forensic 
                         analysis, Mr. Bodine. Of course the 
                         experience of it was somewhat less 
                         clinical.

                                     LOVETT
                         Will you share it with us?

               Her eyes go back to the screens, showing the sad ruins far 
               below them.

               A VIEW from one of the subs TRACKING SLOWLY over the boat 
               deck. Rose recognizes one of the Wellin davits, still in 
               place. She hears ghostly waltz music. The faint and echoing 
               sound of an officer's voice, English accented, calling "Women 
               and children only".

               FLASH CUTS of screaming faces in a running crowd. Pandemonium 
               and terror. People crying, praying, kneeling on the deck. 
               Just impressions... flashes in the dark.

               Rose Looks at another monitor. SNOOP DOG moving down a rusted, 
               debris-filled corridor. Rose watches the endless row of 
               doorways sliding past, like dark mouths.

               IMAGE OF A CHILD

               Three years old, standing ankle deep in water in the middle 
               of an endless corridor. The child is lost alone, crying.

               Rose is shaken by the flood of memories and emotions. Her 
               eyes well up and she puts her head down, sobbing quietly.

                                     LIZZY
                              (taking the wheelchair)
                         I'm taking her to rest.

                                     ROSE
                         No!

               Her voice is surprisingly strong. The sweet little old lady 
               is gone, replaced by a woman with eyes of steel. Lovett 
               signals everyone to stay quiet.

                                     LOVETT
                         Tell us, Rose.

               She looks from screen to screen, the images of the ruined 
               ship.

                                     ROSE
                         It's been 84 years...

                                     LOVETT
                         Just tell us what you can --

                                     ROSE
                              (holds up her hand 
                              for silence)
                         It's been 84 years... and I can still 
                         smell the fresh paint. The china had 
                         never been used. The sheets had never 
                         been slept in.

               He switches on the minirecorder and sets it near her.

                                     ROSE
                         Titanic was called the Ship of Dreams. 
                         And it was. It really was...

               As the underwater camera rises past the rusted bow rail, WE 
               DISSOLVE / MATCH MOVE to that same railing in 1912...

                                                            MATCH DISSOLVE:

               EXT. SOUTHAMPTON DOCK - DAY

               SHOT CONTINUES IN A FLORIOUS REVEAL as the gleaming white 
               superstructure of Titanic rises mountainously beyond the 
               rail, and above that the buff-colored funnels stand against 
               the sky like the pillars of a great temple. Crewmen move 
               across the deck, dwarfed by the awesome scale of the steamer.

               Southampton, England, April 10, 1912. It is almost noon on 
               sailing day. A crowd of hundreds blackens the pier next to 
               Titanic like ants on a jelly sandwich.

               IN FOREGROUND a gorgeous burgundy RENAULT TOURING CAR swings 
               into frame, hanging from a loading crane. It is lowered toward 
               HATCH #2.

               On the pier horsedrawn vehicles, motorcars and lorries move 
               slowly through the dense throng. The atmosphere is one of 
               excitement and general giddiness. People embrace in tearful 
               farewells, or wave and shout bon voyage wishes to friends 
               and relatives on the decks above.

               A white RENAULT, leading a silver-gray DAIMLER-BENZ, pushes 
               through the crowd leaving a wake in the press of people. 
               Around the handsome cars people are streaming to board the 
               ship, jostling with hustling seamen and stokers, porters, 
               and barking WHITE STAR LINE officials.

               The Renault stops and the LIVERIED DRIVER scurries to open 
               the door for a YOUNG WOMAN dressed in a stunning white and 
               purple outfit, with an enormous feathered hat. She is 17 
               years old and beautiful, regal of bearing, with piercing 
               eyes.

               It is the girl in the drawing. Rose. She looks up at the 
               ship, taking it in with cool appraisal.

                                     ROSE
                         I don't see what all the fuss is 
                         about. It doesn't look any bigger 
                         than the Mauretania.

               A PERSONAL VALET opens the door on the other side of the car 
               for CALEDON HOCKLEY, the 30 year old heir to the elder 
               Hockley's fortune. "Cal" is handsome, arrogant and rich beyond 
               meaning.

                                     CAL
                         You can be blasé about some things, 
                         Rose, but not about Titanic. It's 
                         over a hundred feet longer than 
                         Mauretania, and far more luxurious. 
                         It has squash courts, a Parisian 
                         cafe... even Turkish baths.

               Cal turns and fives his hand to Rose's mother, RUTH DEWITT 
               BUKATER, who descends from the touring car being him. Ruth 
               is a 40ish society empress, from one of the most prominent 
               Philadelphia families. She is a widow, and rules her household 
               with iron will.

                                     CAL
                         Your daughter is much too hard to 
                         impress, Ruth.
                              (indicating a puddle)
                         Mind your step.

                                     RUTH
                              (gazing at the 
                              leviathan)
                         So this is the ship they say is 
                         unsinkable.

                                     CAL
                         It is unsinkable. God himself couldn't 
                         sink this ship.

               Cal speaks with the pride of a host providing a special 
               experience.

               This entire entourage of rich Americans is impeccably turned 
               out, a quintessential example of the Edwardian upper class, 
               complete with servants. Cal's VALET, SPICER LOVEJOY, is a 
               tall and impassive, dour as an undertaker. Behind him emerge 
               TWO MAIDS, personal servants to Ruth and Rose.

               A WHITE STAR LINE PORTER scurries toward them, harried by 
               last minute loading.

                                     PORTER
                         Sir, you'll have to check your baggage 
                         through the main terminal, round 
                         that way --

               Cal nonchalantly hands the man a fiver. The porter's eyes 
               dilate. Five pounds was a monster tip in those days.

                                     CAL
                         I put my faith in you, good sir.
                              (curtly, indicating 
                              Lovejoy)
                         See my man.

                                     PORTER
                         Yes, sir. My pleasure, sir.

               Cal never tires of the effect of money on the unwashed masses.

                                     LOVEJOY
                              (to the porter)
                         These trunks here, and 12 more in 
                         the Daimler. We'll have all this lot 
                         up in the rooms.

               The White Star man looks stricken when he sees the enormous 
               pile of steamer trunks and suitcases loading down the second 
               car, including wooden crates and steel safe. He whistles 
               frantically for some cargo-handlers nearby who come running.

               Cal breezes on, leaving the minions to scramble. He quickly 
               checks his pocket watch.

                                     CAL
                         We'd better hurry. This way, ladies.

               He indicates the way toward the first class gangway. They 
               move into the crowd. TRUDY BOLT, Rose's maid, hustles behind 
               them, laden with bags of her mistress's most recent 
               purchases... things too delicate for the baggage handlers.

               Cal leads, weaving between vehicles and handcarts, hurrying 
               passengers (mostly second class and steerage) and well-
               wishers. Most of the first class passengers are avoiding the 
               smelly press of the dockside crowd by using an elevated 
               boarding bridge, twenty feet above.

               They pass a line of steerage passengers in their coarse wool 
               and tweeds, queued up inside movable barriers like cattle in 
               a chute. A HEALTH OFFICER examines their heads one by one, 
               checking scalp and eyelashes for lice.

               They pass a well-dressed young man cranking the handle of a 
               wooden Biograph "cinematograph" camera mounted on a tripod. 
               DANIEL MARVIN (whose father founded the Biograph Film Studio) 
               is filming his young bride in front of the Titanic. MARY 
               MARVIN stands stiffly and smiles, self conscious.

                                     DANIEL
                         Look up at the ship, darling, that's 
                         it. You're amazed! You can't believe 
                         how big it is! Like a mountain. That's 
                         great.

               Mary Marvin, without an acting fiber in her body, does a bad 
               Clara Bow pantomime of awe, hands raised.

               Cal is jostled by two yelling steerage boys who shove past 
               him. And he is bumped again a second later by the boys' 
               father.

                                     CAL
                         Steady!!

                                     MAN
                         Sorry squire!

               The Cockney father pushes on, after his kids, shouting.

                                     CAL
                         Steerage swine. Apparently missed 
                         his annual bath.

                                     RUTH
                         Honestly, Cal, if you weren't forever 
                         booking everything at the last 
                         instant, we could have gone through 
                         the terminal instead of running along 
                         the dock like some squalid immigrant 
                         family.

                                     CAL
                         All part of my charm, Ruth. At any 
                         rate, it was my darling fiancee's 
                         beauty rituals which made us late.

                                     ROSE
                         You told me to change.

                                     CAL
                         I couldn't let you wear black on 
                         sailing day, sweetpea. It's bad luck.

                                     ROSE
                         I felt like black.

               Cal guides them out of the path of a horse-drawn wagon loaded 
               down with two tons of OXFORD MARMALADE, in wooden cases, for 
               Titanic's Victualling Department.

                                     CAL
                         Here I've pulled every string I could 
                         to book us on the grandest ship in 
                         history, in her most luxurious 
                         suites... and you act as if you're 
                         going to your execution.

               Rose looks up as the hull of Titanic looms over them... a 
               great iron wall, Bible black and sever. Cal motions her 
               forward, and she enters the gangway to the D Deck doors with 
               a sense of overwhelming dread.

                                     OLD ROSE (V.O.)
                         It was the ship of dreams... to 
                         everyone else. To me it was a slave 
                         ship, taking me back to America in 
                         chains.

               CLOSE ON CAL'S HAND IN SLOW-MOTION

               As it closes possessively over Rose's arm. He escorts her up 
               the gangway and the black hull of Titanic swallows them.

                                     OLD ROSE (V.O.)
                         Outwardly I was everything a well 
                         brought up girl should be. Inside, I 
                         was screaming.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               A SCREAMING BLAST

               From the mighty triple steam horns on Titanic's funnels, 
               bellowing their departure warning.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. SOUTHAMPTON DOCKS / TITANIC - DAY

               A VIEW OF TITANIC from several blocks away, towering above 
               the terminal buildings like the skyline of a city. The 
               steamer's whistle echoes across Southampton.

               PULL BACK, revealing that we were looking through a window, 
               and back further to show the smoky inside of a pub. It is 
               crowded with dockworkers and ship's crew.

               Just inside the window, a poker game is in progress. FOUR 
               MEN, in working class clothes, play a very serious hand.

               JACK DAWSON and FABRIZIO DE ROSSI, both about 20, exchange a 
               glance as the other two players argue in Swedish. Jack is 
               American, a lanky drifter with his hair a little long for 
               the standards of the times. He is also unshaven, and his 
               clothes are rumpled from sleeping in them. He is an artist, 
               and has adopted the bohemian style of art scene in Paris. He 
               is also very self-possessed and sure-footed for 20, having 
               lived on his own since 15.

               The TWO SWEDES continue their sullen argument, in Swedish.

                                     OLAF
                              (subtitled)
                         You stupid fishhead. I can't believe 
                         you bet our tickets.

                                     SVEN
                              (subtitled)
                         You lost our money. I'm just trying 
                         to get it back. Now shutup and take 
                         a card.

                                     JACK
                              (jaunty)
                         Hit me again, Sven.

               Jack takes the card and slips it into his hand.

               EXTREME CLOSEUP JACK'S EYES

               They betray nothing.

               CLOSE ON FABRIZIO

               Licking his lips nervously as he refuses a card.

               EXTREME CLOSEUP STACK

               In the middle of the table. Bills and coins from four 
               counrties. This has been going on for a while. Sitting on 
               top of the money are two 3RD CLASS TICKETS for RMS TITANIC.

               The Titanic's whistle blows again. Final warning.

                                     JACK
                         The moment of truth boys. Somebody's 
                         life's about to change.

               Fabrizio puts his cards down. So do the Swedes. Jack holds 
               his close.

                                     JACK
                         Let's see... Fabrizio's got niente. 
                         Olaf, you've got squat. Sven, uh 
                         oh... two pair... mmm.
                              (turns to his friend)
                         Sorry Fabrizio.

                                     FABRIZIO
                         What sorry? What you got? You lose 
                         my money?? Ma va fa'n culo testa di 
                         cazzo --

                                     JACK
                         Sorry, you're not gonna see your 
                         mama again for a long time...

               He slaps a full house down on the table.

                                     JACK
                              (grinning)
                         'Cause you're goin' to America!! 
                         Full house boys!

                                     FABRIZIO
                         Porca Madonna!! YEEAAAAA!!!

               The table explodes into shouting in several languages. Jack 
               rakes in the money and the tickets.

                                     JACK
                              (to the Swedes)
                         Sorry boys. Three of a kind and a 
                         pair. I'm high and you're dry and...
                              (to Fabrizio)
                         we're going to --

                                     FABRIZIO / JACK
                         L'AMERICA!!!

               Olaf balls up one huge farmer's fist. We think he's going to 
               clobber Jack, but he swings round and punches Sven, who flops 
               backward onto the floor and sits there, looking depressed. 
               Olaf forgets about Jack and Fabrizio, who are dancing around, 
               and goes into a rapid harangue of his stupid cousin.

               Jack kisses the tickets, then jumps on Fabrizio's back and 
               rides him around the pub. It's like they won the lottery.

                                     JACK
                         Goin' home... to the land o' the 
                         free and the home of the real hot-
                         dogs! On the TITANIC!! We're ridin' 
                         in high style now! We're practically 
                         goddamned royalty, ragazzo mio!!

                                     FABRIZIO
                         You see? Is my destinio!! Like I 
                         told you. I go to l'America!! To be 
                         a millionaire!!
                              (to pubkeeper)
                         Capito?? I go to America!!

                                     PUBKEEPER
                         No, mate. Titanic go to America. In 
                         five minutes.

                                     JACK
                         Shit!! Come on, Fabri!
                              (grabbing their stuff)
                         Come on!!
                              (to all, grinning)
                         It's been grand.

               They run for the door.

                                     PUBKEEPER
                         'Course I'm sure if they knew it was 
                         you lot comin', they'd be pleased to 
                         wait!

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. TERMINAL - TITANIC

               Jack and Fabrizio, carrying everything they own in the world 
               in the kit bags on their shoulders, sprint toward the pier. 
               They tear through milling crowds next to the terminal. Shouts 
               go up behind them as they jostle slow-moving gentlemen. They 
               dodge piles of luggage, and weave through groups of people. 
               They burst out onto the pier and Jack comes to a dead stop... 
               staring at the cast wall of the ship's hull, towering seven 
               stories above the wharf and over an eighth of a mile long. 
               The Titanic is monstrous.

               Fabrizio runs back and grabs Jack, and they sprint toward 
               the third class gangway aft, at E deck. They reach the bottom 
               of the ramp just as SIXTH OFFICER MOODY detaches it at the 
               top. It starts to swing down from the gangway doors.

                                     JACK
                         Wait!! We're passengers!

               Flushed and panting, he waves the tickets.

                                     MOODY
                         Have you been through the inspection 
                         queue?

                                     JACK
                              (lying cheerfully)
                         Of course! Anyway, we don't have 
                         lice, we're Americans.
                              (glances at Fabrizio)
                         Both of us.

                                     MOODY
                              (testy)
                         Right, come aboard.

               Moody has QUARTERMASTER ROWE reattach the gangway. Jack and 
               Fabrizio come aboard. Moody glances at the tickets, then 
               passes Jack and Fabrizio through to Rowe. Rowe looks at the 
               names on the tickets to enter them in the passenger list.

                                     ROWE
                         Gundersen. And...
                              (reading Fabrizio's)
                         Gundersen.

               He hands the tickets back, eyeing Fabrizio's Mediterranean 
               looks suspiciously.

                                     JACK
                              (grabbing Fabrizio's 
                              arm)
                         Come on, Sven.

               Jack and Fabrizio whoop with victory as they run down the 
               white-painted corridero... grinning from ear to ear.

                                     JACK
                         We are the luckiest sons of bitches 
                         in the world!

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. TITANIC AND DOCK - DAY

               The mooring lines, as big around as a man's arm, are dropped 
               into the water. A cheer goes up on the pier as SEVEN TUGS 
               pull the Titanic away from the quay.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. AFT WELL DECK / POOP DECK - DAY

               JACK AND FABRIZIO burst through a door onto the aft well 
               deck. TRACKING WITH THEM as they run across the deck and up 
               the steel stairs to the poop deck. They get to the rail and 
               Jack starts to yell and wave to the crowd on the dock.

                                     FABRIZIO
                         You know somebody?

                                     JACK
                         Of course not. That's not the point.
                              (to the crowd)
                         Goodbye! Goodbye!! I'll miss you!

               Grinning, Fabrizio joins in, adding his voice to the swell 
               of voices, feeling the exhilaration of the moment.

                                     FABRIZIO
                         Goodbye! I will never forget you!!

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. SOUTHAMPTON DOCK - DAY

               The crowd of cheering well-wishers waves heartily as a black 
               wall of metal moves past them. Impossibly tiny figures wave 
               back from the ship's rails. Titanic gathers speed.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. RIVER TEST - DAY

               IN A LONG LENS SHOT the prow of Titanic FILLS FRAME behind 
               the lead tug, which is dwarfed. The bow wave spreads before 
               the mighty plow of the liner's hull as it moves down the 
               River Test toward the English Channel.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. THIRD CLASS BERTHING / G-DECK FORWARD - DAY

               Jack and Fabrizio walk down a narrow corridor with doors 
               lining both sides like a college dorm. Total confusion as 
               people argue over luggage in several languages, or wander in 
               confusion in the labyrinth. They pass emigrants studying the 
               signs over the doors, and looking up the words in phrase 
               books.

               They find their berth. It is a modest cubicle, painted enamel 
               white, with four bunks. Exposed pipes overhead. The other 
               two guys are already there. OLAUS and BJORN GUNDERSEN.

               Jack throws his kit on one open bunk, while Fabrizio takes 
               the other.

                                     BJORN
                              (in Swedish; subtitled)
                         Where is Sven?

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. SUITE B-52-56 - DAY

               By contrast, the so-called "Millionaire Suite" is in the 
               Empire style, and comprises two bedrooms, a bath, WC, wardrobe 
               room, and a large sitting room. In addition there is a private 
               50 foot promenade deck outside.

               A room service waiter pours champagne into a tulip glass of 
               orange juice and hands the Bucks Fizz to Rose. She is looking 
               through her new paintings. There is a Monet of water lilies, 
               a Degas of dancers, and a few abstract works. They are all 
               unknown paintings... lost works.

               Cal is out on the covered deck, which has potted trees and 
               vines on trellises, talking through the doorway to Rose in 
               the sitting room.

                                     CAL
                         Those mud puddles were certainly a 
                         waste of money.

                                     ROSE
                              (looking at a cubist 
                              portrait)
                         You're wrong. They're fascinating. 
                         Like in a dream... there's truth 
                         without logic. What's his name 
                         again...?
                              (reading off the canvas)
                         Picasso.

                                     CAL
                              (coming into the 
                              sitting room)
                         He'll never amount to a thing, trust 
                         me. At least they were cheap.

               A porter wheels Cal's private safe (which we recognize) into 
               the room on a handtruck.

                                     CAL
                         Put that in the wardrobe.

               IN THE BEDROOM

               Rose enters with the large Degas of the dancers. She sets it 
               on the dresser, near the canopy bed. Trudy is already in 
               there, hanging up some of Rose's clothes.

                                     TRUDY
                         It smells so brand new. Like they 
                         built it all just for us. I mean... 
                         just to think that tonight, when I 
                         crawl between the sheets, I'll be 
                         the first --

               Cal appears in the doorway of the bedroom.

                                     CAL
                              (looking at Rose)
                         And when I crawl between the sheets 
                         tonight, I'll still be the first.

                                     TRUDY
                              (blushing at the 
                              innuendo)
                         S'cuse me, Miss.

               She edges around Cal and makes a quick exit. Cal comes up 
               behind Rose and puts his hands on her shoulders. An act of 
               possession, not intimacy.

                                     CAL
                         The first and only. Forever.

               Rose's expression shows how bleak a prospect this is for 
               her, now.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. CHERBOURG HARBOR, FRANCE - LATE DUSK

               Titanic stands silhouetted against a purple post-sunset sky. 
               She is lit up like a floating palace, and her thousand 
               portholes reflect in the calm harbor waters. The 150 foot 
               tender Nomadic lies-to alongside, looking like a rowboat. 
               The lights of a Cherbourg harbor complete the postcard image.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. FIRST CLASS RECEPTION / D-DECK

               Entering the first class reception room from the tender are 
               a number of prominent passengers. A BROAD-SHOULDERED WOMAN 
               in an enormous feathered hat comes up the gangway, carrying 
               a suitcase in each hand, a spindly porter running to catch 
               up with her to take the bags.

                                     WOMAN
                         Well, I wasn't about to wait all day 
                         for you, sonny. Take 'em the rest of 
                         the way if you think you can manage.

                                     OLD ROSE (V.O.)
                         At Cherbourg a woman came aboard 
                         named Margaret Brown, but we all 
                         called her Molly. History would call 
                         her the Unsinkable Molly Brown. Her 
                         husband had struck gold someplace 
                         out west, and she was what mother 
                         called "new money".

               At 45, MOLLY BROWN is a tough talking straightshooter who 
               dresses in the finery of her genteel peers but will never be 
               one of them.

                                     OLD ROSE (V.O.)
                         By the next afternoon we had made 
                         our final stop and we were steaming 
                         west from the coast of Ireland, with 
                         nothing out ahead of us but ocean...

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. BOW - DAY

               The ship glows with the warm creamy light of late afternoon. 
               Jack and Fabrizio stand right at the bow gripping the curving 
               railing so familiar from images of the wreck. Jack leans 
               over, looking down fifty feet to where the prow cuts the 
               surface like a knife, sending up two glassy sheets of water.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. / EXT. TITANIC - SERIES OF SCENES - DAY

               ON THE BRIDGE, CAPTAIN SMITH turns from the binnacle to FIRST 
               OFFICER WILLIAM MURDOCH.

                                     CAPTAIN SMITH
                         Take her to sea Mister Murdoch. Let's 
                         stretch her legs.

               Murdoch moves the engine telegraph lever to ALL AHEAD FULL.

               Now begins a kind of musical/visual setpiece... an ode to 
               the great ship. The music is rhythmic, surging forward, with 
               a soaring melody that addresses the majesty and optimism of 
               the ship of dreams.

               IN THE ENGINE ROOM

               The telegraph clangs and moves to "All Ahead Full".

                                     CHIEF ENGINEER BELL
                         All ahead full!

               On the catwalk THOMAS ANDREWS, the shipbuilder, watches 
               carefully as the engineers and greasers scramble to adjust 
               valves. Towering above them are the twin RECIPROCATING 
               engines, four stories tall, their ten-foot-long connecting 
               rods surging up and down with the turning of the massive 
               crankshafts. The engines thunder like the footfalls of 
               marching giants.

               IN THE BOILER ROOMS

               The STOKERS chant a song as they hurl coal into the roaring 
               furnaces. The "black gang" are covered with sweat and coal 
               dust, their muscles working like part of the machinery as 
               they toil in the hellish glow.

               UNDERWATER

               The enormous bronze screws chop through the water, hurling 
               the steamer forward and churning up a vortex of foam that 
               lingers for miles behind the juggernaut ship. Smoke pours 
               from the funnels as --

               The water flares higher at the bow as the ship's speeds 
               builds. THE CAMERA SWEEPS UP the prow to find Jack, the wind 
               streaming through his hair and --

               Captain Smith steps out of the enclosed bridge onto the wing. 
               He stands with his hands on the rail, looking every bit the 
               storybook picture of a Captain... a great patriarch of the 
               sea.

                                     FIRST OFFICER MURDOCH
                         Twenty one knots, sir!

                                     SMITH
                         She's got a bone in her teeth now, 
                         eh, Mr. Murdoch.

               Smith accepts a cup of tea from FIFTH OFFICER LOWE. He 
               contentedly watches the white V of water hurled outward from 
               the bows like an expression of his own personal power. They 
               are invulnerable, towering over the sea.

               AT THE BOW Jack and Fabrizio lean far over, looking down.

               In the glassy bow-wave two dolphins appear, under the water, 
               running fast just in front of the steel blade of the prow. 
               They do it for the sheer joy and exultation of motion. Jack 
               watches the dolphins and grins. They breach, jumping clear 
               of the water and then dive back, crisscrossing in front of 
               the bow, dancing ahead of the juggernaut.

               Fabrizio looks forward across the Atlantic, staring into the 
               sunsparkles.

                                     FABRIZIO
                         I can see the Statue of Liberty 
                         already.
                              (grinning at Jack)
                         Very small... of course.

               THE CAMERA ARCS around them, until they are framed against 
               the sea.

               NOW WE PULL BACK, across the forecastle deck. Rising, as we 
               continue back, and the ships rolls endlessly forward 
               underneath. Over the bridge wing, along the boat deck until 
               her funnels come INTO FRAME besides us and march past like 
               the pillars of heaven, one by one. We pull back and up, until 
               we are looking down the funnels, and the people strolling on 
               the decks and standing at the rail become antlike.

               And still we pull back until the great lady is seen whole in 
               a gorgeous aerial portrait, black and severe in her majesty.

                                     ISMAY (V.O.)
                         She is the largest moving object 
                         ever made by the hand of man in all 
                         history...

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. PALM COURT RESTAURANT - DAY

               CLOSE ON J. BRUCE ISMAY, Managing Director of White Star 
               Line.

                                     ISMAY
                         ...and our master shipbuilder, Mr. 
                         Andrews here, designed her from the 
                         keel plates up.

               He indicates a handsome 39 year old Irish gentlemen to his 
               right, THOMAS ANDREWS, of Harland and Wolf Shipbuilders.

               WIDER

               Showing the group assembled for lunch the next day. Ismay 
               seated with Cal, Rose, Ruth, Molly Brown and Thomas Andrews 
               in the Palm Court, a beautiful sunny spot enclosed by high 
               arched windows.

                                     ANDREWS
                              (disliking the 
                              attention)
                         Well, I may have knocked her together, 
                         but the idea was Mr. Ismay's. He 
                         envisioned a steamer so grand in 
                         scale, and so luxurious in its 
                         appointments, that its supremacy 
                         would never be challenged. And here 
                         she is...
                              (he slaps the table)
                         ...willed into solid reality.

                                     MOLLY
                         Why're ships always bein' called 
                         "she"? Is it because men think half 
                         the women around have big sterns and 
                         should be weighed in tonnage?
                              (they all laugh)
                         Just another example of the men 
                         settin' the rules their way.

               The waiter arrives to take orders. Rose lights a cigarette.

                                     RUTH
                         You know I don't like that, Rose.

                                     CAL
                         She knows.

               Cal takes the cigarette from her and stubs it out.

                                     CAL
                              (to the waiter)
                         We'll both have the lamb. Rare, with 
                         a little mint sauce.
                              (to Rose, after the 
                              waiter moves away)
                         You like lamb, don't you sweetpea?

               Molly is watching the dynamic between Rose, Cal and Ruth.

                                     MOLLY
                         So, you gonna cut her meat for her 
                         too there, Cal?
                              (turning to Ismay)
                         Hey, who came up with the name 
                         Titanic? You, Bruce?

                                     ISMAY
                         Yes, actually. I wanted to convey 
                         sheer size. And size means stability, 
                         luxury... and safety --

                                     ROSE
                         Do you know of Dr. Freud? His ideas 
                         about the male preoccupation with 
                         size might be of particular interest 
                         to you, Mr. Ismay.

               Andrews chockes on his breadstick, suppressing laughter.

                                     RUTH
                         My God, Rose, what's gotten into --

                                     ROSE
                         Excuse me.

               She stalks away.

                                     RUTH
                              (mortified)
                         I do apologize.

                                     MOLLY
                         She's a pistol, Cal. You sure you 
                         can handle her?

                                     CAL
                              (tense but feigning 
                              unconcern)
                         Well, I may have to start minding 
                         what she reads from now on.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. POOP DECK / AFTER DECKS - DAY

               Jack sits on a bench in the sun. Titanic's wake spreads out 
               behind him to the horizon. He has his knees pulled up, 
               supporting a leather bound sketching pad, his only valuable 
               possession. With conte crayon he draws rapidly, using sure 
               strokes. An emigrant from Manchester named CARTMELL has his 
               3 year old daughter CORA standing on the lower rung of the 
               rail. She is leaned back against his beer barrel of a stomach, 
               watching the seagulls.

               THE SKETCH captures them perfectly, with a great sense of 
               the humanity of the moment. Jack is good. Really good. 
               Fabrizio looks over Jack's shoulder. He nods appreciatively.

               TOMMY RYAN, a scowling young Irish emigrant, watches as a 
               crewmember comes by, walking three small dogs around the 
               deck. One of them, a BLACK FRENCH BULLDOG, is among the 
               ugliest creatures on the planet.

                                     TOMMY
                         That's typical. First class dogs 
                         come down here to take a shit.

               Jack looks up from his sketch.

                                     JACK
                         That's so we know where we rank in 
                         the scheme of things.

                                     TOMMY
                         Like we could forget.

               Jack glances across the well deck. At the aft railing of B 
               deck promenade stands ROSE, in a long yellow dress and white 
               gloves.

               CLOSE ON JACK

               Unable to take his eyes off of her. They are across from 
               each other, about 60 feet apart, with the well deck like a 
               valley between them. She on her promontory, he on his much 
               lower one. She stares down at the water.

               He watches her unpin her elaborate hat and take it off. She 
               looks at the frilly absurd thing, then tosses it over the 
               rail. It sails far down to the water and is carried away, 
               astern. A spot of yellow in the vast ocean. He is riveted by 
               her. She looks like a figure in a romantic novel, sad and 
               isolated.

               Fabrizio taps Tommy and they both look at Jack gazing at 
               Rose. Fabrizio and Tommy grin at each other.

               Rose turns suddenly and looks right at Jack. He is caught 
               staring, but he doesn't look away. She does, but then looks 
               back. Their eyes meet across the space of the well deck, 
               across the gulf between worlds.

               Jack sees a man (Cal) come up behind her and take her arm. 
               She jerks her arm away. They argue in pantomime. She storms 
               away, and he goes after her, disappearing along the A-deck 
               promenade. Jack stares after her.

                                     TOMMY
                         Forget it, boyo. You'd as like have 
                         angels fly out o' yer arse as get 
                         next to the likes o' her.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. FIRST CLASS DINING SALOON - NIGHT

               SLOWLY PUSHING IN ON ROSE as she sits, flanked by people in 
               heated conversation. Cal and Ruth are laughing together, 
               while on the other side LADY DUFF-GORDON is holding forth 
               animatedly. We don't hear what they are saying. Rose is 
               staring at her plate, barely listening to the inconsequential 
               babble around her.

                                     OLD ROSE (V.O.)
                         I saw my whole life as if I'd already 
                         lived it... an endless parade of 
                         parties and cotillions, yachts and 
                         polo matches... always the same narrow 
                         people, the same mindless chatter. I 
                         felt like I was standing at a great 
                         precipice, with no one to pull me 
                         back, no one who cared... or even 
                         noticed.

               ANGLE BENEATH TABLE

               Showing Rose's hand, holding a tiny fork from her crab salad. 
               She pokes the crab-fork into the skin of her arm, harder and 
               harder until it draws blood.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. CORRIDOR / B DECK - NIGHT

               Rose walks along the corridor. A steward coming the other 
               way greets her, and she nods with a slight smile. She is 
               perfectly composed.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. ROSE'S BEDROOM - NIGHT

               She enters the room. Stands in the middle, staring at her 
               reflection in the large vanity mirror. Just stands there, 
               then --

               With a primal, anguished cry she claws at her throat, ripping 
               off her pearl necklace, which explodes across the room. In a 
               frenzy she tears at herself, her clothes, her hair... then 
               attacks the room. She flings everything off the dresser and 
               it flies clattering against the wall. She hurls a handmirror 
               against the vanity, cracking it.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. A DECK PROMENADE, AFT - NIGHT

               Rose runs along the B deck promenade. She is dishevelled, 
               her hair flying. She is crying, her cheeks streaked with 
               tears. But also angry, furious! Shaking with emotions she 
               doesn't understand... hatred, self-hatred, desperation. A 
               strolling couple watch her pass. Shocked at the emotional 
               display in public.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. POOP DECK - NIGHT

               Jack is kicked back on one of the benches gazing at the stars 
               blazing gloriously overhead. Thinking artist thoughts and 
               smoking a cigarette.

               Hearing something, he turns as Rose runs up the stairs from 
               the well deck. They are the only two on the stern deck, except 
               for QUARTERMASTER ROWE, twenty feet above them on the docking 
               bridge catwalk. She doesn't see Jack in the shadows, and 
               runs right past him.

               TRACKING WITH ROSE as she runs across the deserted fantail. 
               Her breath hitches in an occasional sob, which she suppresses. 
               Rose slams against the base of the stern flagpole and clings 
               there, panting. She stares out at the black water.

               Then starts to climb over the railing. She has to hitch her 
               long dress way up, and climbing is clumsy. Moving methodically 
               she turns her body and gets her heels on the white-painted 
               gunwale, her back to the railing, facing out toward blackness. 
               60 feet below her, the massive propellers are churning the 
               Atlantic into white foam, and a ghostly wake trails off toward 
               the horizon.

               IN A LOW ANGLE, we see Rose standing like a figurehead in 
               reverse. Below her are the huge letters of the name "TITANIC".

               She leans out, her arms straightening... looking down 
               hypnotized, into the vortex below her. Her dress and hair 
               are lifted by the wind of the ship's movement. The only sound, 
               above the rush of water below, is the flutter and snap of 
               the big Union Jack right above her.

                                     JACK
                         Don't do it.

               She whips her head around at the sound of his voice. It takes 
               a second for her eyes to focus.

                                     ROSE
                         Stay back! Don't come any closer!

               Jack sees the tear tracks on her cheeks in the faint glow 
               from the stern running lights.

                                     JACK
                         Take my hand. I'll pull you back in.

                                     ROSE
                         No! Stay where you are. I mean it. 
                         I'll let go.

                                     JACK
                         No you won't.

                                     ROSE
                         What do you mean no I won't? Don't 
                         presume to tell me what I will and 
                         will not do. You don't know me.

                                     JACK
                         You would have done it already. Now 
                         come on, take my hand.

               Rose is confused now. She can't see him very well through 
               the tears, so she wipes them with one hand, almost losing 
               her balance.

                                     ROSE
                         You're distracting me. Go away.

                                     JACK
                         I can't. I'm involved now. If you 
                         let go I have to jump in after you.

                                     ROSE
                         Don't be absurd. You'll be killed.

               He takes off his jacket.

                                     JACK
                         I'm a good swimmer.

               He starts unlacing his left shoe.

                                     ROSE
                         The fall alone would kill you.

                                     JACK
                         It would hurt. I'm not saying it 
                         wouldn't. To be honest I'm a lot 
                         more concerned about the water being 
                         so cold.

               She looks down. The reality factor of what she is doing is 
               sinking in.

                                     ROSE
                         How cold?

                                     JACK
                              (taking off his left 
                              shoe)
                         Freezing. Maybe a couple degrees 
                         over.

               He starts unlacing his right shoe.

                                     JACK
                         Ever been to Wisconsin?

                                     ROSE
                              (perplexed)
                         No.

                                     JACK
                         Well they have some of the coldest 
                         winters around, and I grew up there, 
                         near Chippewa Falls. Once when I was 
                         a kid me and my father were ice-
                         fishing out on Lake Wissota... ice-
                         fishing's where you chop a hole in 
                         the --

                                     ROSE
                         I know what ice fishing is!

                                     JACK
                         Sorry. Just... you look like kind of 
                         an indoor girl. Anyway, I went through 
                         some thin ice and I'm tellin' ya, 
                         water that cold... like that right 
                         down there... it hits you like a 
                         thousand knives all over your body. 
                         You can't breath, you can't think... 
                         least not about anything but the 
                         pain.
                              (takes off his other 
                              shoe)
                         Which is why I'm not looking forward 
                         to jumping in after you. But like I 
                         said, I don't see a choice. I guess 
                         I'm kinda hoping you'll come back 
                         over the rail and get me off the 
                         hook here.

                                     ROSE
                         You're crazy.

                                     JACK
                         That's what everybody says. But with 
                         all due respect, I'm not the one 
                         hanging off the back of a ship.

               He slides one step closer, like moving up on a spooked horse.

                                     JACK
                         Come on. You don't want to do this. 
                         Give me your hand.

               Rose stares at this madman for a long time. She looks at his 
               eyes and they somehow suddenly seem to fill her universe.

                                     ROSE
                         Alright.

               She unfastens one hand from the rail and reaches it around 
               toward him. He reaches out to take it, firmly.

                                     JACK
                         I'm Jack Dawson.

                                     ROSE
                              (voice quavering)
                         Pleased to meet you, Mr. Dawson.

               Rose starts to turn. Now that she has decided to live, the 
               height is terrifying. She is overcome by vertigo as she shifts 
               her footing, turning to face the ship. As she starts to climb, 
               her dress gets in the way, and one foot slips off the edge 
               of the deck.

               She plunges, letting out a piercing SHRIEK. Jack, gripping 
               her hand, is jerked toward the rail. Rose barely grabs a 
               lower rail with her free hand.

               QUARTERMASTER ROWE, up on the docking bridge hears the scream 
               and heads for the ladder.

                                     ROSE
                         HELP! HELP!!

                                     JACK
                         I've got you. I won't let go.

               Jack holds her hand with all his strength, bracing himself 
               on the railing with his other hand. Rose tries to get some 
               kind of foothold on the smooth hull. Jack tries to lift her 
               bodily over the railing. She can't get any footing in her 
               dress and evening shoes, and she slips back. Rose SCREAMS 
               again.

               Jack, awkwardly clutching Rose by whatever he can get a grip 
               on as she flails, gets her over the railing. They fall 
               together onto the deck in a tangled heap, spinning in such a 
               way that Jack winds up slightly on top of her.

               Rowe slides down the ladder from the docking bridge like 
               it's a fire drill and sprints across the fantail.

                                     ROWE
                         Here, what's all this?!

               Rowe runs up and pulls Jack off of Rose, revealing her 
               dishevelled and sobbing on the deck. Her dress is torn, and 
               the hem is pushing up above her knees, showing one ripped 
               stocking. He looks at Jack, the shaggy steerage man with his 
               jacket off, and the first class lady clearly in distress, 
               and starts drawing conclusions. Two seamen chug across the 
               deck to join them.

                                     ROWE
                              (to Jack)
                         Here you, stand back! Don't move an 
                         inch!
                              (to the seamen)
                         Fetch the Master at Arms.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. POOP DECK - NIGHT

               A few minutes later. Jack is being detained by the burly 
               MASTER AT ARMS, the closest thing to a cop on board. He is 
               handcuffing Jack. Cal is right in front of Jack, and furious. 
               He has obviously just rushed out here with Lovejoy and another 
               man, and none of them have coats over their black tie evening 
               dress. The other man is COLONEL ARCHIBALD GRACIE, a 
               mustachioed blowhard who still has his brandy snifter. He 
               offers it to Rose, who is hunched over crying on a bench 
               nearby, but she waves it away. Cal is more concerned with 
               Jack. He grabs him by the lapels.

                                     CAL
                         What made you think you could put 
                         your hands on my fiancee?! Look at 
                         me, you filth! What did you think 
                         you were doing?!

                                     ROSE
                         Cal, stop! It was an accident.

                                     CAL
                         An accident?!

                                     ROSE
                         It was... stupid really. I was leaning 
                         over and I slipped.

               Rose looks at Jack, getting eye contact.

                                     ROSE
                         I was leaning way over, to see the... 
                         ah... propellers. And I slipped and 
                         I would have gone overboard... and 
                         Mr. Dawson here saved me and he almost 
                         went over himself.

                                     CAL
                         You wanted to see the propellers?

                                     GRACIE
                              (shaking his head)
                         Women and machinery do not mix.

                                     MASTER AT ARMS
                              (to Jack)
                         Was that the way of it?

               Rose is begging him with her eyes not to say what really 
               happened.

                                     JACK
                         Uh huh. That was pretty much it.

               He looks at Rose a moment longer. Now they have a secret 
               together.

                                     COLONEL GRACIE
                         Well! The boy's a hero then. Good 
                         for you son, well done!
                              (to Cal)
                         So it's all's well and back to our 
                         brandy, eh?

               Jack is uncuffed. Cal gets Rose to her feet and moving.

                                     CAL
                              (rubbing her arms)
                         Let's get you in. You're freezing.

               Cal is leaving without a second thought for Jack.

                                     GRACIE
                              (low)
                         Ah... perhaps a little something for 
                         the boy?

                                     CAL
                         Oh, right. Mr. Lovejoy. A twenty 
                         should do it.

                                     ROSE
                         Is that the going rate for saving 
                         the woman you love?

                                     CAL
                         Rose is displeased. Mmm... what to 
                         do?

               Cal turns back to Jack. He appraises him condescendingly... 
               a steerage ruffian, unwashed and ill-mannered.

                                     CAL
                         I know.
                              (to Jack)
                         Perhaps you could join us for dinner 
                         tomorrow, to regale our group with 
                         your heroic tale?

                                     JACK
                              (looking straight at 
                              Rose)
                         Sure. Count me in.

                                     CAL
                         Good. Settled then.

               Cal turns to go, putting a protective arm around Rose. He 
               leans close to Gracie as they walk away.

                                     CAL
                         This should be amusing.

                                     JACK
                              (as Lovejoy passes)
                         Can I bum a cigarette?

               Lovejoy smoothly draws a silver cigarette case from his jacket 
               and snaps it open. Jack takes a cigarette, then another, 
               popping it behind his ear for later. Lovejoy lights Jack's 
               cigarette.

                                     LOVEJOY
                         You'll want to tie those.
                              (Jack looks at his 
                              shoes)
                         Interesting that the young lady 
                         slipped so mighty all of a sudden 
                         and you still had time to take of 
                         your jacket and shoes. Mmmm?

               Lovejoy's expression is bland, but the eyes are cold. He 
               turns away to join his group.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. ROSE'S BEDROOM - NIGHT

               As she undresses for bed Rose sees Cal standing in her 
               doorway, reflected in the cracked mirror of her vanity. He 
               comes toward her.

                                     CAL
                              (unexpectedly tender)
                         I know you've been melancholy, and I 
                         don't pretend to know why.

               From behind his back he hands her a large black velvet jewel 
               case. She takes it, numbly.

                                     CAL
                         I intended to save this till the 
                         engagement gals next week. But I 
                         thought tonight, perhaps a reminder 
                         of my feeling for you...

               Rose slowly opens the box. Inside is the necklace... "HEART 
               OF THE OCEAN" in all its glory. It is huge... a malevolent 
               blue stone glittering with an infinity of scalpel-like inner 
               reflections.

                                     ROSE
                         My God... Cal. Is it a --

                                     CAL
                         Diamond. Yes it is. 56 carats.

               He takes the necklace and during the following places it 
               around her throat. He turns her to the mirror, staring behind 
               her.

                                     CAL
                         It was once worn by Louis the 
                         Sixteenth. They call it Le Coeur de 
                         la Mer, the --

                                     ROSE
                         The Heart of the Ocean. Cal, it's... 
                         it's overwhelming.

               He gazes at the image of the two of them in the mirror.

                                     CAL
                         It's for royalty. And we are royalty.

               His fingers caress her neck and throat. He seems himself to 
               be disarmed by Rose's elegance and beauty. His emotion is, 
               for the first time, unguarded.

                                     CAL
                         There's nothing I couldn't give you. 
                         There's nothing I'd deny you if you 
                         would deny me. Open your heart to 
                         me, Rose.

               CAMERA begins to TRACK IN ON ROSE. Closer and closer, during 
               the following:

                                     OLD ROSE (V.O.)
                         Of course his gift was only to reflect 
                         light back onto himself, to illuminate 
                         the greatness that was Caledon 
                         Hockley. It was a cold stone... a 
                         heart of ice.

               Finally, when Rose's eyes FILL FRAME, we MORPH SLOWLY to her 
               eyes as the are now... transforming through 84 years of 
               life...

               TRANSITION

               INT. KELDYSH IMAGING SHACK

               Without a cut the wrinkled, weathered landscape of age has 
               appeared around her eyes. But the eyes themselves are the 
               same.

                                     OLD ROSE
                         After all these years, feel it closing 
                         around my throat like a dog collar.

               THE CAMERA PUllS BACK to show her whole face.

                                     ROSE
                         I can still feel its weight. If you 
                         could have felt it, not just seen 
                         it...

                                     LOVETT
                         Well, that's the general idea, my 
                         dear.

                                     BODINE
                         So let me get this right. You were 
                         gonna kill yourself by jumping off 
                         the Titanic?
                              (he guffaws)
                         That's great!

                                     LOVETT
                              (warningly)
                         Lewis...

               But Rose laughs with Bodine.

                                     BODINE
                              (still laughing)
                         All you had to do was wait two days!

               Lovett, standing out of Rose's sightline, checks his watch. 
               Hours have passed. This process is taking too long.

                                     LOVETT
                         Rose, tell us more about the diamond. 
                         What did Hockley do with it after 
                         that?

                                     ROSE
                         I'm afraid I'm feeling a little tired, 
                         Mr. Lovett.

               Lizzy picks up the cue and starts to wheel her out.

                                     LOVETT
                         Wait! Can you give us something go 
                         on, here. Like who had access to the 
                         safe. What about this Lovejoy guy? 
                         The valet. Did he have the 
                         combination?

                                     LIZZY
                         That's enough.

               Lizzy takes her out. Rose's old hand reappears at the doorway 
               in a frail wave goodbye.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. LAUNCH AREA / KELDYSH DECK - DAY

               As the big hydraulic jib swings one of the Mir subs out over 
               the water. Lovett walks as he talks with Bobby Buell, the 
               partners' rep. They weave among deck cranes, launch crew, 
               sub maintenance guys.

                                     BUELL
                         The partners are pissed.

                                     BROCK
                         Bobby, buy me time. I need time.

                                     BUELL
                         We're running thirty thousand a day, 
                         and we're six days over. I'm telling 
                         you what they're telling me. The 
                         hand is on the plug. It's starting 
                         to pull.

                                     BROCK
                         Well you tell the hand I need another 
                         two days! Bobby, Bobby, Bobby... 
                         we're close! I smell it. I smell 
                         ice. She had the diamond on... now 
                         we just have to find out where it 
                         wound up. I just gotta work her a 
                         bit more. Okay?

               Brock turns and sees Lizzy standing behind him. She has 
               overheard the past part of his dialogue with Buell. He goes 
               to her and hustles her away from Buell, toward a quite spot 
               on the deck.

                                     BROCK
                         Hey, Lizzy. I need to talk to you 
                         for a second.

                                     LIZZY
                         Don't you mean work me?

                                     BROCK
                         Look, I'm running out of time. I 
                         need your help.

                                     LIZZY
                         I'm not going to help you browbeat 
                         my hundred and one year old 
                         grandmother. I came down here to 
                         tell you to back off.

                                     BROCK
                              (with undisguised 
                              desperation)
                         Lizzy... you gotta understand 
                         something. I've bet it all to find 
                         the Heart of the Ocean. I've got all 
                         my dough tied up in this thing. My 
                         wife even divorced me over this hunt. 
                         I need what's locked inside your 
                         grandma's memory.
                              (he holds out his 
                              hand)
                         You see this? Right here?

               She looks at his hand, palm up. Empty. Cupped, as if around 
               an imaginary shape.

                                     LIZZY
                         What?

                                     BROCK
                         That's the shape my hand's gonna be 
                         when I hold that thing. You 
                         understand? I'm not leaving here 
                         without it.

                                     LIZZY
                         Look, Brock, she's going to do this 
                         her way, in her own time. Don't 
                         forget, she contacted you. She's out 
                         here for her own reasons, God knows 
                         what they are.

                                     LOVETT
                         Maybe she wants to make peace with 
                         the past.

                                     LIZZY
                         What past? She has never once, not 
                         once, ever said a word about being 
                         on the Titanic until two days ago.

                                     LOVETT
                         Then we're all meeting your 
                         grandmother for the first time.

                                     LIZZY
                              (looks at him hard)
                         You think she was really there?

                                     LOVETT
                         Oh, yeah. Yeah, I'm a believer. She 
                         was there.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. IMAGING SHACK

               Bodine starts the tape recorder. Rose is gazing at the screen 
               seeing THE LIVE FEED FROM THE WRECK -- SNOOP DOG is moving 
               along the starboard side of the hull, heading aft. The 
               rectangular windows of A deck (forward) march past on the 
               right.

                                     ROSE
                         The next day, Saturday, I remember 
                         thinking how the sunlight felt.

                                                               DISSOLVE TO:

               EXT. B DECK TITANIC - DAY

               MATCH DISSOLVE from the rusting hulk to the gleaming new 
               Titanic in 1912, passing the end of the enclosed promenade 
               just as Rose walks into the sunlight right in front of us. 
               She is stunningly dressed and walking with purpose.

                                     OLD ROSE (V.O.)
                         As if I hadn't felt the sun in years.

               IT IS SATURDAY APRIL 13, 1912. Rose unlatches the gate to go 
               down into third class. The steerage men on the deck stop 
               what they're doing and stare at her.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. THIRD CLASS GENERAL ROOM

               The social center of steerage life. It is stark by comparison 
               to the opulence of first class, but is a loud, boisterous 
               place. There are mothers with babies, kids running between 
               the benches yelling in several languages and being scolded 
               in several more. There are old women yelling, men playing 
               chess, girls doing needlepoint and reading dime novels. There 
               is even an upright piano and Tommy Ryan is noodling around 
               it.

               Three boys, shrieking and shouting, are scrambling around 
               chasing a rat under the benches, trying to whomp it with a 
               shoe and causing general havoc. Jack is playing with 5 year 
               old CORA CARTMELL, drawing funny faces together in his 
               sketchbook.

               Fabrizio is struggling to get a conversation going with an 
               attractive Norwegian girl, HELGA DAHL, sitting with her family 
               at a table across the room.

                                     FABRIZIO
                         No Italian? Some little English?

                                     HELGA
                         No, no. Norwegian. Only.

               Helga's eye is caught by something. Fabrizio looks, does a 
               take... and Jack, curious, follows their gaze to see...

               Rose, coming toward them. The activity in the room stops... 
               a hush falls. Rose feels suddenly self-conscious as the 
               steerage passengers stare openly at this princess, some with 
               resentment, others with awe. She spots Jack and gives a little 
               smile, walking straight to him. He rises to meet her, smiling.

                                     ROSE
                         Hello Jack.

               Fabrizio and Tommy are floored. Its like the slipper fitting 
               Cinderella.

                                     JACK
                         Hello again.

                                     ROSE
                         Could I speak to you in private?

                                     JACK
                         Uh, yes. Of course. After you.

               He motions her ahead and follows. Jack glances over his 
               shoulder, one eyebrow raised, as he walks out with her leaving 
               a stunned silence.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. BOAT DECK - DAY

               Jack and Rose walk side by side. They pass people reading 
               and talking in steamer chairs, some of whom glance curiously 
               at the mismatched couple. He feels out of place in his rough 
               clothes. They are both awkward, for different reasons.

                                     JACK
                         So, you got a name by the way?

                                     ROSE
                         Rose. Rose DeWitt Bukater.

                                     JACK
                         That's quite a moniker. I may hafta 
                         get you to write that down.

               There is an awkward pause.

                                     ROSE
                         Mr. Dawson, I --

                                     JACK
                         Jack.

                                     ROSE
                         Jack... I feel like such an idiot. 
                         It took me all morning to get up the 
                         nerve to face you.

                                     JACK
                         Well, here you are.

                                     ROSE
                         Here I am. I... I want to thank you 
                         for what you did. Not just for... 
                         for pulling me back. But for your 
                         discretion.

                                     JACK
                         You're welcome. Rose.

                                     ROSE
                         Look, I know what you must be 
                         thinking! Poor little rich girl. 
                         What does she know about misery?

                                     JACK
                         That's not what I was thinking. What 
                         I was thinking was... what could 
                         have happened to hurt this girl so 
                         much she though she had no way out.

                                     ROSE
                         I don't... it wasn't just one thing. 
                         It was everything. It was them, it 
                         was their whole world. And I was 
                         trapped in it, like an insect in 
                         amber.
                              (in a rush)
                         I just had to get away... just run 
                         and run and run... and then I was at 
                         the back rail and there was no more 
                         ship... even the Titanic wasn't big 
                         enough. Not enough to get away from 
                         them. And before I'd really though 
                         about it, I was over the rail. I was 
                         so furious. I'll show them. They'll 
                         be sorry!

                                     JACK
                         Uh huh. They'll be sorry. 'Course 
                         you'll be dead.

                                     ROSE
                              (she lowers her head)
                         Oh God, I am such an utter fool.

                                     JACK
                         That penguin last night, is he one 
                         of them?

                                     ROSE
                         Penguin? Oh, Cal! He is them.

                                     JACK
                         Is he your boyfriend?

                                     ROSE
                         Worse I'm afraid.

               She shows him her engagement ring. A sizable diamond.

                                     JACK
                         Gawd look at that thing! You would 
                         have gone straight to the bottom.

               They laugh together. A passing steward scowls at Jack, who 
               is clearly not a first class passenger, but Rose just glares 
               at him away.

                                     JACK
                         So you feel like you're stuck on a 
                         train you can't get off 'cause you're 
                         marryin' this fella.

                                     ROSE
                         Yes, exactly!

                                     JACK
                         So don't marry him.

                                     ROSE
                         If only it were that simple.

                                     JACK
                         It is that simple.

                                     ROSE
                         Oh, Jack... please don't judge me 
                         until you've seen my world.

                                     JACK
                         Well, I guess I will tonight.

               Looking for another topic, any other topic, she indicates 
               his sketchbook.

                                     ROSE
                         What's this?

                                     JACK
                         Just some sketches.

                                     ROSE
                         May I?

               The question is rhetorical because she has already grabbed 
               the book. She sits on a deck chair and opens the sketchbook. 

               ON JACK'S sketches... each one an expressive little bit of 
               humanity: an old woman's hands, a sleeping man, a father and 
               daughter at the rail. The faces are luminous and alive. His 
               book is a celebration of the human condition.

                                     ROSE
                         Jack, these are quite good! Really, 
                         they are.

                                     JACK
                         Well, they didn't think too much of 
                         'em in Paree.

               Some loose sketches fall out and are taken by the wind. Jack 
               scrambles after them... catching two, but the rest are gone, 
               over the rail.

                                     ROSE
                         Oh no! Oh, I'm so sorry. Truly!

                                     JACK
                         Well, they didn't think too much of 
                         'em in Paree.

               He snaps his wrist, shaking his drawing hand in a flourish.

                                     JACK
                         I just seem to spew 'em out. Besides, 
                         they're not worth a damn anyway.

               For emphasis he throws away the two he caught. They sail 
               off.

                                     ROSE
                              (laughing)
                         You're deranged!

               She goes back to the book, turning a page.

                                     ROSE
                         Well, well...

               She has come upon a series of nudes. Rose is transfixed by 
               the languid beauty he has created. His nudes are soulful, 
               real, with expressive hands and eyes. They feel more like 
               portraits than studies of the human form... almost 
               uncomfortably intimate. Rose blushes, raising the book as 
               some strollers go by.

                                     ROSE
                              (trying to be very 
                              adult)
                         And these were drawn from life?

                                     JACK
                         Yup. That's one of the great things 
                         about Paris. Lots of girls willing 
                         take their clothes off.

               She studies one drawing in particular, the girl posed half 
               in sunlight, half in shadow. Her hands lie at her chin, one 
               furled and one open like a flower, languid and graceful. The 
               drawing is like an Alfred Steiglitz print of Georgia O'Keefe.

                                     ROSE
                         You liked this woman. You used her 
                         several times.

                                     JACK
                         She had beautiful hands.

                                     ROSE
                              (smiling)
                         I think you must have had a love 
                         affair with her...

                                     JACK
                              (laughing)
                         No, no! Just with her hands.

                                     ROSE
                              (looking up from the 
                              drawings)
                         You have a gift, Jack. You do. You 
                         see people.

                                     JACK
                         I see you.

               There it is. That piercing gaze again.

                                     ROSE
                         And...?

                                     JACK
                         You wouldn'ta jumped.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. RECEPTION ROOM / D-DECK - DAY

               Ruth is having tea with NOEL LUCY MARTHA DYER-EDWARDS, the 
               COUNTESS OF ROTHES, a 35ish English blue-blood with patirician 
               features. Ruth sees someone coming across the room and lowers 
               her voice.

                                     RUTH
                         Oh no, that vulgar Brown woman is 
                         coming this way. Get up, quickly 
                         before she sits with us.

               Molly Brown walks up, greeting them cheerfully as they are 
               rising.

                                     MOLLY
                         Hello girls, I was hoping I'd catch 
                         you at tea.

                                     RUTH
                         We're awfully sorry you missed it. 
                         The Countess and I are just off to 
                         take the air on the boat deck.

                                     MOLLY
                         That sounds great. Let's go. I need 
                         to catch up on the gossip.

               Ruth grits her teeth as the three of them head for the Grand 
               Staircase to go up. TRACKING WITH THEM, as they cross the 
               room, the SHOT HANDS OFF to Bruce Ismay and Captain Smith at 
               another table.

                                     ISMAY
                         So you've not lit the last four 
                         boilers then?

                                     SMITH
                         No, but we're making excellent time.

                                     ISMAY
                              (impatiently)
                         Captain, the press knows the size of 
                         Titanic, let them marvel at her speed 
                         too. We must give them something new 
                         to print. And the maiden voyage of 
                         Titanic must make headlines!

                                     SMITH
                         I prefer not to push the engines 
                         until they've been properly run in.

                                     ISMAY
                         Of course I leave it to your good 
                         offices to decide what's best, but 
                         what a glorious end to your last 
                         crossing if we get into New York 
                         Tuesday night and surprise them all.
                              (Ismay slaps his hand 
                              on the table)
                         Retire with a bang, eh, E.J.?

               A beat. Then Smith nods, stiffy.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. A DECK PROMENADE - DAY

               Rose and Jack stroll aft, past people lounging on deck chairs 
               in the slanting late-afternoon light. Stewards scurry to 
               serve tea or hot cocoa.

                                     ROSE
                              (girlish and excited)
                         You know, my dream has always been 
                         to just chuck it all and become an 
                         artist... living in a garret, poor 
                         but free!

                                     JACK
                              (laughing)
                         You wouldn't last two days. There's 
                         no hot water, and hardly ever any 
                         caviar.

                                     ROSE
                              (angry in a flash)
                         Listen, buster... I hate caviar! And 
                         I'm tired of people dismissing my 
                         dreams with a chuckle and a pat on 
                         the head.

                                     JACK
                         I'm sorry. Really... I am.

                                     ROSE
                         Well, alright. There's something in 
                         me, Jack. I feel it. I don't know 
                         what it is, whether I should be an 
                         artist, or, I don't know... a dancer. 
                         Like Isadora Duncan.... a wild pagan 
                         spirit...

               She leaps forward, lands deftly and whirls like a dervish. 
               Then she sees something ahead and her face lights up.

                                     ROSE
                         ...or a moving picture actress!

               She takes his hand and runs, pulling him along the deck toward --

               DANIEL AND MARY MARVIN. Daniel is cranking the big wooden 
               movie camera as she poses stiffly at the rail.

                                     MARVIN
                         You're sad. Sad, sad, sad. You've 
                         left your lover on the shore. You 
                         may never see him agian. Try to be 
                         sadder, darling.

               SUDDENLY Rose shoots into the shot and strikes a theatrical 
               pose at the rail next to Mary. Mary bursts out laughing. 
               Rose pulls Jack into the picture and makes him pose.

               Marvin grins and starts yelling and gesturing. We see this 
               in CUTS, with music and no dialogue.

               SERIES OF CUTS:

               Rose posing tragically at the rail, the back of her hand to 
               her forehead.

               Jack on a deck chair, pretending to be a Pasha, the two girls 
               pantomiming fanning him like slave girls.

               Jack, on his knees, pleading with his hands clasped while 
               Rose, standing, turns her head in bored disdain.

               Rose cranking the camera, while Daniel and Jack have a western 
               shoot-out. Jack wins and leers into the lens, twirling an 
               air mustache like Snidely Whiplash.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. A DECK PROMENADE / AFT - SUNSET

               Painted with orange light, Jack and Rose lean on the A-deck 
               rail aft, shoulder to shoulder. The ship's lights come on.

               It is a magical moment... perfect.

                                     ROSE
                         So then what, Mr. Wandering Jack?

                                     JACK
                         Well, then logging got to be too 
                         much like work, so I went down to 
                         Los Angeles to the pier in Santa 
                         Monica. That's a swell place, they 
                         even have a rollercoaster. I sketched 
                         portraits there for ten cents a piece.

                                     ROSE
                         A whole ten cents?!

                                     JACK
                              (not getting it)
                         Yeah; it was great money... I could 
                         make a dollar a day, sometimes. But 
                         only in summer. When it got cold, I 
                         decided to go to Paris and see what 
                         the real artists were doing.

                                     ROSE
                              (looks at the dusk 
                              sky)
                         Why can't I be like you Jack? Just 
                         head out for the horizon whenever I 
                         feel like it.
                              (turning to him)
                         Say we'll go there, sometime... to 
                         that pier... even if we only ever 
                         just talk about it.

                                     JACK
                         Alright, we're going. We'll drink 
                         cheap beer and go on the rollercoaster 
                         until we throw up and we'll ride 
                         horses on the beach... right in the 
                         surf... but you have to ride like a 
                         cowboy, none of that side-saddle 
                         stuff.

                                     ROSE
                         You mean one leg on each side? 
                         Scandalous! Can you show me?

                                     JACK
                         Sure. If you like.

                                     ROSE
                              (smiling at him)
                         I think I would.
                              (she looks at the 
                              horizon)
                         And teach me to spit too. Like a 
                         man. Why should only men be able to 
                         spit. It's unfair.

                                     JACK
                         They didn't teach you that in 
                         finishing school? Here, it's easy. 
                         Watch closely.

               He spits. It arcs out over the water.

                                     JACK
                         Your turn.

               Rose screws up her mouth and spits. A pathetic little bit of 
               foamy spittle which mostly runs down her chin before falling 
               off into the water.

                                     JACK
                         Nope, that was pitiful. Here, like 
                         this... you hawk it down... 
                         HHHNNNK!... then roll it on your 
                         tongue, up to the front, like thith, 
                         then a big breath and PLOOOW!! You 
                         see the range on that thing?

               She goes through the steps. Hawks it down, etc. He coaches 
               her through it (ad lib) while doing the steps himself. She 
               lets fly. So does he. Two comets of gob fly out over the 
               water.

                                     JACK
                         That was great!

               Rose turns to him, her face alight. Suddenly she blanches. 
               He sees her expression and turns.

               Ruth, the Countess of Rothes, and Molly Brown have been 
               watching them hawking lugees. Rose becomes instantly composed.

                                     ROSE
                         Mother, may I introduce Jack Dawson.

                                     RUTH
                         Charmed, I'm sure.

               Jack has a little spit running down his chin. He doesn't 
               know it. Molly Brown is grinning. As Rose proceeds with the 
               introductions, we hear...

                                     OLD ROSE (V.O.)
                         The others were gracious and curious 
                         about the man who'd saved my life. 
                         But my mother looked at him like an 
                         insect. A dangerous insect which 
                         must be squashed quickly.

                                     MOLLY
                         Well, Jack, it sounds like you're a 
                         good man to have around in a sticky 
                         spot --

               They all jump as a BUGLER sounds the meal call right behind 
               them.

                                     MOLLY
                         Why do they insist on always 
                         announcing dinner like a damn cavalry 
                         charge?

                                     ROSE
                         Shall we go dress, mother?
                              (over her shoulder)
                         See you at dinner, Jack.

                                     RUTH
                              (as they walk away)
                         Rose, look at you... out in the sun 
                         with no hat. Honestly!

               The Countess exits with Ruth and Rose, leaving Jack and Molly 
               alone on deck.

                                     MOLLY
                         Son, do you have the slightest 
                         comprehension of what you're doing?

                                     JACK
                         Not really.

                                     MOLLY
                         Well, you're about to go into the 
                         snakepit. I hope you're ready. What 
                         are you planning to wear?

               Jack looks down at his clothes. Back up at her. He hadn't 
               thought about that.

                                     MOLLY
                         I figured.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. MOLLY BROWN'S STATEROOM

               Men's suits and jackets and formal wear are strewn all over 
               the place. Molly is having a fine time. Jack is dressed, 
               except for his jacket, and Molly is tying his bow tie.

                                     MOLLY
                         Don't feel bad about it. My husband 
                         still can't tie one of these damn 
                         things after 20 years. There you go.

               She picks up a jacket off the bed and hands it to him. Jack 
               goes into the bathroom to put it on. Molly starts picking up 
               the stuff off the bed.

                                     MOLLY
                         I gotta buy everything in three sizes 
                         'cause I never know how much he's 
                         been eating while I'm away.

               She turns and sees him, though we don't.

                                     MOLLY
                         My, my, my... you shine up like a 
                         new penny.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. BOAT DECK / FIRST CLASS ENTRANCE - DUSK

               A purple sky, shot with orange, in the west. Drifting strains 
               of classic music. We TRACK WITH JACK along the deck. By 
               Edwardian standards he looks badass. Dashing in his borrowed 
               white-tie outfit, right down to his pearl studs.

               A steward bows and smartly opens the door to the First Class 
               Entrance.

                                     STEWARD
                         Good evening, sir.

               Jack plays the role smoothly. Nods with just the right degree 
               of disdain.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. UPPER LANDING / GRAND STAIRCASE AND A-DECK

               Jack steps in and his breath is taken away by the splendor 
               spread out before him. Overhead is the enormous glass dome, 
               with a crystal chandelier at its center. Sweeping down six 
               stories is the First Class Grand Staircase, the epitome of 
               the opulent naval architecture of the time.

               And the people: the women in their floor length dresses, 
               elaborate hairstyles and abundant jewelry... the gentlemen 
               in evening dress, standing with one hand at the small of the 
               back, talking quietly.

               Jack descends to A deck. Several men nod a perfunctory 
               greeting. He nods back, keeping it simple. He feels like a 
               spy.

               Cal comes down the stairs, with Ruth on his arm, covered in 
               jewelry. They both walk right past Jack, neither one 
               recognizing him. Cal nods at him, one gent to another. But 
               Jack barely has time to be amused. Because just behind Cal 
               and Ruth on the stairs is Rose, a vision in red and black, 
               her low-cut dress showing off her neck and shoulders, her 
               arms sheathed in white gloves that come well above above the 
               elbow. Jack is hypnotized by her beauty.

               CLOSE ON ROSE

               As she approaches Jack. He imitates the gentlemen's stance, 
               hand behind his back. She extends her gloved hand and he 
               takes it, kissing the back of her fingers. Rose flushes, 
               beaming noticeably. She can't take her eyes off him.

                                     JACK
                         I saw that in a nickelodeon once, 
                         and I always wanted to do it.

                                     ROSE
                         Cal, surely you remember Mr. Dawson.

                                     CAL
                              (caught off guard)
                         Dawson! I didn't recognize you.
                              (studies him)
                         Amazing! You could almost pass for a 
                         gentlemen.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. D-DECK RECEPTION ROOM

               CUT TO THE RECEPTION ROOM ON D-DECK, as the party descends 
               to dinner. They encounter Molly Brown, looking good in a 
               beaded dress, in her own busty broad-shouldered way. Molly 
               grins when she sees Jack. As they are going into the dining 
               saloon she walks next to him, speaking low:

                                     MOLLY
                         Ain't nothin' to it, is there, Jack?

                                     JACK
                         Yeah, you just dress like a pallbearer 
                         and keep your nose up.

                                     MOLLY
                         Remember, the only thing they respect 
                         is money, so just act like you've 
                         got a lot of it and you're in the 
                         club.

               As they enter the swirling throng, Rose leans close to him, 
               pointing out several notables.

                                     ROSE
                         There's the Countess Rothes. And 
                         that's John Jacob Astor... the richest 
                         man on the ship. His little wifey 
                         there, Madeleine, is my age and in a 
                         delicate condition. See how she's 
                         trying to hide it. Quite the scandal.
                              (nodding toward a 
                              couple)
                         And over there, that's Sir Cosmo and 
                         Lucile, Lady Duff-Gordon. She designs 
                         naughty lingerie, among her many 
                         talents. Very popular with the royals.

               Cal becomes engrossed in a conversations with Cosmo Duff-
               Gordon and Colonel Gracie, while Ruth, the Countess and 
               Lucille discuss fashion. Rose picots Jack smoothly, to show 
               him another couple, dressed impeccably.

                                     ROSE
                         And that's Benjamin Guggenheim and 
                         his mistress, Madame Aubert. Mrs. 
                         Guggenheim is at home with the 
                         children, of course.

               Cal, meanwhile, is accepting the praise of his male 
               counterparts, who are looking at Rose like a prize show horse.

                                     SIR COSMO
                         Hockley, she is splendid.

                                     CAL
                         Thank you.

                                     GRACIE
                         Cal's a lucky man. I know him well, 
                         and it can only be luck.

               Ruth steps over, hearing the last. She takes Cal's arm, 
               somewhat coquettishly.

                                     RUTH
                         How can you say that Colonel? Caledon 
                         Hockley is a great catch.

               The entourage strolls toward the dining saloon, where they 
               run into the Astor's going through the ornate double doors.

                                     ROSE
                         J.J., Madeleine, I'd like you to 
                         meet Jack Dawson.

                                     ASTOR
                              (shaking his hand)
                         Good to meet you Jack. Are you of 
                         the Boston Dawsons?

                                     JACK
                         No, the Chippewa Falls Dawsons, 
                         actually.

               J.J. nods as if he's heard of them, then looks puzzled. 
               Madeleine Astor appraises Jack and whispers girlishly to 
               Rose:

                                     MADELEINE
                         It's a pity we're both spoken for, 
                         isn't it?

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. DINING SALOON

               Like a ballroom at the palace, alive and lit by a 
               constellation of chandeliers, full of elegantly dressed people 
               and beautiful music from BANDLEADER WALLACE HARTLEY'S small 
               orchestra. As Rose and Jack enter and move across the room 
               to their table, Cal and Ruth beside them, we hear...

                                     OLD ROSE (V.O.)
                         He must have been nervous but he 
                         never faltered. They assumed he was 
                         one of them... a young captain of 
                         industry perhaps... new money, 
                         obviously, but still a member of the 
                         club. Mother of course, could always 
                         be counted upon...

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. DINING SALOON - CLOSE ON RUTH

                                     RUTH
                         Tell us of the accommodations in 
                         steerage, Mr. Dawson. I hear they're 
                         quite good on this ship.

               WIDER: THE TABLE

               Jack is seated opposite Rose, who is flanked by Cal and Thomas 
               Andrews. Also at the table are Molly Brown, Ismay, Colonel 
               Gracie, the Countess, Guggenheim, Madame Aubert, and the 
               Astors.

                                     JACK
                         The best I've seen, m'am. Hardly any 
                         rats.

               Rose motions surreptitiously for Jack to take his napkin off 
               his plate.

                                     CAL
                         Mr. Dawson is joining us from third 
                         class. He was of some assistance to 
                         my fiancee last night.
                              (to Jack, as if to a 
                              child)
                         This is foie gras. It's goose liver.

               We see whispers exchanged. Jack becomes the subject of furtive 
               glances. Now they're all feeling terribly liberal and 
               dangerous.

                                     GUGGENHEIM
                              (low to Madame Aubert)
                         What is Hockley hoping to prove, 
                         bringing this... bohemian... up here?

                                     WAITER
                              (to Jack)
                         How do you take your caviar, sir?

                                     CAL
                              (answering for him)
                         Just a soupcon of lemon...
                              (to Jack, smiling)
                         ...it improves the flavor with 
                         champagne.

                                     JACK
                              (to the waiter)
                         No caviar for me, thanks.
                              (to Cal)
                         Never did like it much.

               He looks at Rose, pokerfaced, and she smiles.

                                     RUTH
                         And where exactly do you live, Mr. 
                         Dawson?

                                     JACK
                         Well, right now my address is the 
                         RMS Titanic. After that, I'm on God's 
                         good humor.

               Salad is served. Jack reaches for the fish fork. Rose gives 
               him a look and picks up the salad fork, prompting him with 
               her eyes. He changes forks.

                                     RUTH
                         You find that sort of rootless 
                         existence appealing, do you?

                                     JACK
                         Well... it's a big world, and I want 
                         to see it all before I go. My father 
                         was always talkin' about goin' to 
                         see the ocean. He died in the town 
                         he was born in, and never did see 
                         it. You can't wait around, because 
                         you never know what hand you're going 
                         to get dealt next. See, my folks 
                         died in a fire when I was fifteen, 
                         and I've been on the road since. 
                         Somethin' like that teaches you to 
                         take life as it comes at you. To 
                         make each day count.

               Molly Brown raises her glass in a salute.

                                     MOLLY
                         Well said, Jack.

                                     COLONEL GRACIE
                              (raising his glass)
                         Here, here.

               Rose raises her glass, looking at Jack.

                                     ROSE
                         To making it count.

               Ruth, annoyed that Jack has scored a point, presses him 
               further.

                                     RUTH
                         How is it you have the means to 
                         travel, Mr. Dawson?

                                     JACK
                         I work my way from place to place. 
                         Tramp steamers and such. I won my 
                         ticket on Titanic here in a lucky 
                         hand at poker.
                              (he glances at Rose)
                         A very lucky hand.

                                     GRACIE
                         All life is a game of luck.

                                     CAL
                         A real man makes his own luck, Archie.

               Rose notices that Thomas Andrews, sitting next to her, is 
               writing in his notebook, completely ignoring the conversation.

                                     ROSE
                         Mr. Andrews, what are you doing? I 
                         see you everywhere writing in this 
                         little book.
                              (grabs it and reads)
                         Increase number of screws in hat 
                         hooks from 2 to 3. You build the 
                         biggest ship in the world and this 
                         preoccupies you?!

               Andrews smiles sheepishly.

                                     ISMAY
                         He knows every rivet in her, don't 
                         you Thomas?

                                     ANDREWS
                         All three million of them.

                                     ISMAY
                         His blood and soul are in the ship. 
                         She may be mine on paper, but in the 
                         eyes of God she belongs to Thomas 
                         Andrews.

                                     ROSE
                         Your ship is a wonder, Mr. Andrews. 
                         Truly.

                                     ANDREWS
                         Thank you, Rose.

               We see that Andrews has come under Rose's spell.

               TIME TRANSITION

               Dessert has been served and a waiter arrives with cigars in 
               a humidor on a wheeled cart. The men start clipping ends and 
               lighting.

                                     ROSE
                              (low, to Jack)
                         Nest it'll be brandies in the Smoking 
                         Room.

                                     GRACIE
                              (rising)
                         Well, join me for a brandy, gentlemen?

                                     ROSE
                              (low)
                         Now they retreat into a cloud of 
                         smoke and congratulate each other on 
                         being masters of the universe.

                                     GRACIE
                         Joining us, Dawson? You don't want 
                         to stay out here with the women, do 
                         you?

               Actually he does, but...

                                     JACK
                         No thanks. I'm heading back.

                                     CAL
                         Probably best. It'll be all business 
                         and politics, that sort of thing. 
                         Wouldn't interest you. Good of you 
                         to come.

               Cal and the other gentlemen exit.

                                     ROSE
                         Jack, must you go?

                                     JACK
                         Time for my coach to turn back into 
                         a pumpkin.

               He leans over to take her hand.

               INSERT:

               We see him slip a tiny folded not into her palm.

               Ruth, scowling, watches him walk away across the enormous 
               room. Rose surreptitiously opens the note below table level. 
               It reads: "Make it count. Meet me at the clock".

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. A-DECK FOYER - NIGHT

               Rose crosses the A-Deck foyer, sighting Jack at the landing 
               above. Overhead is the crystal dome. Jack has his back to 
               her, studying the ornate clock with its carved figures of 
               Honor and Glory. It softly strikes the hour.

               MOVING WITH ROSE as she goes up the sweeping staircase toward 
               him. He turns, sees her... smiles.

                                     JACK
                         Want to go to a real party?

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. THIRD CLASS GENERAL ROOM

               Crowded and alive with music, laughter and raucous carrying 
               on. An ad hoc band is gathered near the upright piano, honking 
               out lively stomping music on fiddle, accordion and tambourine. 
               People of all ages are dancing, drinking beer and wine, 
               smoking, laughing, even brawling.

               Tommy hands Rose a pint of stout and she hoists it. Jack 
               meanwhile dances with 5 year old Cora Cartmell, or tries to, 
               with her standing on his feet. As the tune ends, Rose leans 
               down to the little girl.

                                     ROSE
                         May I cut in, miss?

                                     JACK
                         You're still my best girl, Cora.

               Cora scampers off. Rose and Jack face each other. She is 
               trembling as he takes her right hand in his left. His other 
               hand slides to the small of her back. It is an electrifying 
               moment.

                                     ROSE
                         I don't know the steps.

                                     JACK
                         Just move with me. Don't think.

               The music starts and they are off. A little awkward at first, 
               she starts to get into it. She grins at Jack as she starts 
               to get the rhythm of the steps.

                                     ROSE
                         Wait... stop!

               She bends down, pulling off her high heeled shoes, and flings 
               them to Tommy. Then she grabs Jack and they plunge back into 
               the fray, dancing faster as the music speeds up.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. THIRD CLASS GENERAL ROOM

               The scene is rowdy and rollicking. A table gets knocked over 
               as a drunk crashes into it. And in the middle of it... Rose 
               dancing with Jack in her stocking feet. The steps are fast 
               and she shines with sweat. A space opens around them, and 
               people watch them, clapping as the band plays faster and 
               faster.

               FABRIZIO AND HELGA

               Dancing has obviated the need for a common language. He whirls 
               her, then she responds by whirling him... Fabrizio's eyes go 
               wide when he realizes she's stronger than he is.

               The tune ends in a mad rush. Jack steps away from Rose with 
               a flourish, allowing her to take a bow. Exhilarated and 
               slightly tipsy, she does a graceful ballet ployer, feet turned 
               out perfectly. Everyone laughs and applauds. Rose is a hit 
               with the steerage folks, who've never had a lady party with 
               them.

               They move to a table, flushed and sweaty. Rose grabs 
               Fabrizio's cigarette and takes a big drag. She's feeling 
               cocky. Fabrizio is grinning, holding hands with Helga.

                                     JACK
                         How you two doin'?

                                     FABRIZIO
                         I don't know what she's say, she 
                         don't know what I say, so we get 
                         along fine.

               Tommy walks up with a pint for each of them. Rose chugs hers, 
               showing off.

                                     ROSE
                         You think a first class girl can't 
                         drink?

               Everybody else is dancing again, and Bjorn Gundersen crashes 
               into Tommy, who sloshes his beer over Rose's dress. She 
               laughs, not caring. But Tommy lunges, grabbing Bjorn and 
               wheeling him around.

                                     TOMMY
                         You stupid bastard!!

               Bjorn comes around, his fists coming up... and Jack leaps 
               into the middle of it, pushing them apart.

                                     JACK
                         Boys, boys! Did I ever tell you the 
                         one about the Swede and the Irishman 
                         goin' to the whorehouse?

               Tommy stands there, all piss and vinegar, chest puffed up. 
               Then he grins and claps Bjorn on the shoulder.

                                     ROSE
                         So, you think you're big tough men? 
                         Let's see you do this.

               In her stocking feet she assumes a ballet stance, arms raised, 
               and goes up on point, taking her entire weight on the tips 
               of her toes. The guys gape at her incredible muscle control. 
               She comes back down, then her face screws up in pain. She 
               grabs one foot, hopping around.

                                     ROSE
                         Oooowww! I haven't done that in years.

               Jack catches her as she loses her balance, and everyone cracks 
               up.

               The DOOR to the well deck is open a few inches as Lovejoy 
               watches through the gap. He sees Jack holding Rose, both of 
               them laughing.

               Lovejoy closes the door.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. BOAT DECK - NIGHT

               The stars blaze overhead, so bright and clear you can see 
               the Milky Way. Rose and Jack walk along the row of lifeboats. 
               Still giddy from the party, they are singing a popular song 
               "Come Josephine in My Flying Machine".

                                     JACK / ROSE
                         Come Josephine in my flying machine 
                         And it's up she goes! Up she goes! 
                         In the air she goes. Where? There 
                         she goes!

               They fumble the words and break down laughing. They have 
               reached the First Class Entrance, but don't go straight in, 
               not wanting the evening to end. Through the doors the sound 
               of the ship's orchestra wafts gently. Rose grabs a davit and 
               leans back, staring at the cosmos.

                                     ROSE
                         Isn't it magnificent? So grand and 
                         endless.

               She goes to the rail and leans on it.

                                     ROSE
                         They're such small people, Jack... 
                         my crowd. They think they're giants 
                         on the earth, but they're not even 
                         dust in God's eye. They live inside 
                         this little tiny champagne bubble... 
                         and someday the bubble's going to 
                         burst.

               He leans at the rail next to her, his hand just touching 
               hers. It is the slightest contact imaginable, and all either 
               one of them can feel is that square inch of skin where their 
               hands are touching.

                                     JACK
                         You're not one of them. There's been 
                         a mistake.

                                     ROSE
                         A mistake?

                                     JACK
                         Uh huh. You got mailed to the wrong 
                         address.

                                     ROSE
                              (laughing)
                         I did, didn't I?
                              (pointing suddenly)
                         Look! A shooting star.

                                     JACK
                         That was a long one. My father used 
                         to say that whenever you saw one, it 
                         was a soul going to heaven.

                                     ROSE
                         I like that. Aren't we supposed to 
                         wish on it?

               Jack looks at her, and finds that they are suddenly very 
               close together. It would be so easy to move another couple 
               of inches, to kiss her. Rose seems to be thinking the same 
               thing.

                                     JACK
                         What would you wish for?

               After a beat, Rose pulls back.

                                     ROSE
                         Something I can't have.
                              (she smiles sadly)
                         Goodnight, Jack. And thank you.

               She leaves the rail and hurries through the First Class 
               Entrance.

                                     JACK
                         Rose!!

               But the door bangs shut, and she is gone. Back to her world.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. ROSE AND CAL'S SUITE / PRIVATE PROMENADE - DAY

               SUNDAY APRIL 14, 1912. A bright clear day. Sunlight splashing 
               across the promenade. Rose and Cal are having breakfast in 
               silence. The tension is palpable. Trudy Bolt, in her maid's 
               uniform, pours the coffee and goes inside.

                                     CAL
                         I had hoped you would come to me 
                         last night.

                                     ROSE
                         I was tired.

                                     CAL
                         Yes. Your exertions below decks were 
                         no doubt exausting.

                                     ROSE
                              (stiffening)
                         I see you had that undertaker of a 
                         manservant follow me.

                                     CAL
                         You will never behave like that again! 
                         Do you understand?

                                     ROSE
                         I'm not some foreman in your mills 
                         than you can command! I am your 
                         fiancee --

               Cal explodes, sweeping the breakfast china off the table 
               with a crash. He moves to her in one shocking moment, 
               glowering over her and gripping the sides of her chair, so 
               she is trapped between his arms.

                                     CAL
                         Yes! You are! And my wife... in 
                         practice, if not yet by law. So you 
                         will honor me, as a wife is required 
                         to honor her husband! I will not be 
                         made out a fool! Is this in any way 
                         unclear?

               Rose shrinks into the chair. She sees Trudy, frozen, part 
               way through the door bringing the orange juice. Cal follows 
               Rose's glance and straightens up. He stalks past the maid, 
               entering the stateroom.

                                     ROSE
                         We... had a little accident. I'm 
                         sorry, Trudy.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. RUTH'S SUITE - DAY

               Rose is dressed for the day, and is in the middle of helping 
               Ruth with her corset. The tight bindings do not inhibit Ruth's 
               fury at all.

                                     RUTH
                         You are not to see that boy again, 
                         do you understand me Rose? I forbid 
                         it!

               Rose has her knee at the base of her mother's back and is 
               pulling the corset strings with both hands.

                                     ROSE
                         Oh, stop it, Mother. You'll give 
                         yourself a nosebleed.

               Ruth pulls away from her, and crosses to the door, locking 
               it. CLACK!

                                     RUTH
                              (wheeling on her)
                         Rose, this is not a game! Our 
                         situation is precarious. You know 
                         the money's gone!

                                     ROSE
                         Of course I know it's gone. You remind 
                         me every day!

                                     RUTH
                         Your father left us nothing but a 
                         legacy of bad debts hidden by a good 
                         name. And that name is the only card 
                         we have to play.

               Rose turns her around and grabs the corset strings again. 
               Ruth sucks in her waist and Rose pulls.

                                     RUTH
                         I don't understand you. It is a fine 
                         match with Hockley, and it will insure 
                         our survival.

                                     ROSE
                              (hurt and lost)
                         How can you put this on my shoulders?

               Rose turns to her, and we see what Rose sees -- the naked 
               fear in her mother's eyes.

                                     RUTH
                         Do you want to se me working as a 
                         seamstress? Is that what you want? 
                         Do you want to see our fine things 
                         sold at an auction, our memories 
                         scattered to the winds? My God, Rose, 
                         how can you be so selfish?

                                     ROSE
                         It's so unfair.

                                     RUTH
                         Of course it's unfair! We're women. 
                         Our choices are never easy.

               Rose pulls the corset tighter.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. FIRST CLASS DINING SALOON

               At the divine service, Captain Smith is leading a group in 
               the hymn "Almighty Father Strong To Save." Rose and Ruth 
               sing in the middle of the group.

               Lovejoy stands well back, keeping an eye on Rose. He notices 
               a commotion at the entry doors. Jack has been halted there 
               by two stewards. He is dressed in his third class clothes, 
               and stands there, hat in hand, looking out of place.

                                     STEWARD
                         Look, you, you're not supposed to be 
                         in here.

                                     JACK
                         I was just here last night... don't 
                         you remember?
                              (seeing Lovejoy coming 
                              toward him)
                         He'll tell you.

                                     LOVEJOY
                         Mr. Hockley and Mrs. DeWitt Bukater 
                         continue to be most appreciative of 
                         your assistance. They asked me to 
                         give you this in gratitude --

               He holds out two twenty dollar bills, which Jack refuses to 
               take.

                                     JACK
                         I don't want money, I --

                                     LOVEJOY
                         ...and also to remind you that you 
                         hold a third class ticket and your 
                         presence here is no longer 
                         appropriate.

               Jack spots Rose but she doesn't see him.

                                     JACK
                         I just need to talk to Rose for a --

                                     LOVEJOY
                         Gentlemen, please see that Mr. Dawson 
                         gets back where he belongs.
                              (giving the twenties 
                              to the stewards)
                         And that he stays there.

                                     STEWARD
                         Yes sir!
                              (to Jack)
                         Come along you.

               END ON ROSE

               Not seeing Jack hustled out.

                                     ROSE
                              (singing)
                         O hear us when we cry to thee for 
                         those in peril on the sea.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. GYMNASIUM - DAY

               An Edwardian nautilus room. There are machines we recognize, 
               and some don't. A woman pedals a stationary bicycle in a 
               long dress, looking ridiculous. Thomas Andrews is leading a 
               small tour group, including Rose, Ruth and Cal. Cal is working 
               the oars of a stationary rowing machine with a well trained 
               stroke.

                                     CAL
                         Reminds me of my Harvard days.

               T.W. McCAULEY, the gym instructor, is a bouncy little man in 
               white flannels, eager to show off his modern equipment, like 
               his present-day counterpart on an "Abflex" infomercial. He 
               hits a switch and a machine with a saddle on it starts to 
               undulate. Rose puts her hand on it, curious.

                                     MCCAULEY
                         The electric horse is very popular. 
                         We even have an electric camel.
                              (to Ruth)
                         Care to try your hand at the rowing, 
                         m'am?

                                     RUTH
                         Don't be absurd. I can't think of a 
                         skill I should likely need less.

                                     ANDREWS
                         The next stop on our tour will be 
                         bridge. This way, please.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. AFT WELL DECK, B-DECK AND A-DECK - DAY

               Jack, walking with determination, is followed closely by 
               Tommy and Fabrizio. He quickly climbs the steps to B-Deck 
               and steps over the gate separating 3rd from 2nd class.

                                     TOMMY
                         She's a goddess amongst mortal men, 
                         there's no denyin'. But she's in 
                         another world, Jackie, forget her. 
                         She's closed the door.

               Jack moves furtively to the wall below the A-Deck promenade, 
               aft.

                                     JACK
                         It was them, not her.
                              (glancing around the 
                              deck)
                         Ready... go.

               Tommy shakes his head resignedly and puts his hands together, 
               crouching down. Jack steps into Tommy's hands and gets boosted 
               up to the next deck, where he scrambles nimbly over the 
               railing, onto the First Class deck.

                                     TOMMY
                         He's not bein' logical, I tell ya.

                                     FABRIZIO
                         Amore is'a not logical.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. A-DECK / AFT - DAY

               A man is playing with his son, who is spinning a top with a 
               string. The man's overcoat and hat are sitting on a deck 
               chair nearby. Jack emerges from behind one of the huge deck 
               cranes and calmly picks up the coat and bowler hat. He walks 
               away, slipping into the coat, and slicks his hair back with 
               spit. Then puts the hat on at a jaunty angle. At a distance 
               he could pass for a gentlemen.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. BRIDGE / CHARTROOM - DAY

               HAROLD BRIDE, the 21 year old Junior Wireless Operator, 
               hustles in and skirts around Andrews' tour group to hand a 
               Marconigram to Captain Smith.

                                     BRIDE
                         Another ice warning, sir. This one 
                         from the "Baltic".

                                     SMITH
                         Thank you, Sparks.

               Smith glances at the message then nonchalantly puts it in 
               his pocket. He nods reassuringly to Rose and the group.

                                     SMITH
                         Not to worry, it's quite normal for 
                         this time of year. In fact, we're 
                         speeding up. I've just ordered the 
                         last boilers lit.

               Andrews scowls slightly before motioning the group toward 
               the door. They exit just as SECOND OFFICER CHARLES HERBERT 
               LIGHTOLLER comes out of the chartroom, stopping next to First 
               Officer Murdoch.

                                     LIGHTOLLER
                         Did we ever find those binoculars 
                         for the lookouts?

                                     FIRST OFFICER MURDOCH
                         Haven't seen them since Southampton.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. BOAT DECK / STARBOARD SIDE - DAY

               Andrews leads the group back from the bridge along the boat 
               deck.

                                     ROSE
                         Mr. Andrews, I did the sum in my 
                         head, and with the number of lifeboats 
                         times the capacity you mentioned... 
                         forgive me, but it seems that there 
                         are not enough for everyone aboard.

                                     ANDREWS
                         About half, actually. Rose, you miss 
                         nothing, do you? In fact, I put in 
                         these new type davits, which can 
                         take an extra row of boats here.
                              (he gestures along 
                              the deck)
                         But it was thought... by some... 
                         that the deck would look too 
                         cluttered. So I was over-ruled.

                                     CAL
                              (slapping the side of 
                              a boat)
                         Waste of deck space as it is, on an 
                         unsinkable ship!

                                     ANDREWS
                         Sleep soundly, young Rose. I have 
                         built you a good ship, strong and 
                         true. She's all the lifeboat you 
                         need.

               As they are passing Boat 7, a gentlemen turns from the rail 
               and walks up behind the group. It is Jack. He taps Rose on 
               the arm and she turns, gasping. He motions and she cuts away 
               from the group toward a door which Jack holds open. They 
               duck into the --

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. GYMNASIUM - DAY

               Jack closes the door behind her, and glances out through the 
               ripple-glass window to the starboard rail, where the gym 
               instructor is chatting up the woman who was riding the bike. 
               Rose and Jack are alone in the room.

                                     ROSE
                         Jack, this is impossible. I can't 
                         see you.

               He takes her by the shoulders.

                                     JACK
                         Rose, you're no picnic... you're a 
                         spoiled little brat even, but under 
                         that you're a strong, pure heart, 
                         and you're the most amazingly 
                         astounding girl I've ever known and --

                                     ROSE
                         Jack, I --

                                     JACK
                         No wait. Let me try to get this out. 
                         You're amazing... and I know I have 
                         nothing to offer you, Rose. I know 
                         that. But I'm involved now. You jump, 
                         I jump, remember? I can't turn away 
                         without knowin' that you're goin' to 
                         be alright.

               Rose feels the tears coming to her eyes. Jack is so open and 
               real... not like anyone she has ever known.

                                     ROSE
                         You're making this very hard. I'll 
                         be fine. Really.

                                     JACK
                         I don't think so. They've got you in 
                         a glass jar like some butterfly, and 
                         you're goin' to die if you don't 
                         break out. Maybe not right away, 
                         'cause you're strong. But sooner or 
                         later the fire in you is goin' to go 
                         out.

                                     ROSE
                         It's not up to you to save me, Jack.

                                     JACK
                         You're right. Only you can do that.

                                     ROSE
                         I have to get back, they'll miss me. 
                         Please, Jack, for both our sakes, 
                         leave me alone.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. FIRST CLASS LOUNGE - DAY

               The most elegant room on the ship, done in Louis Quinze 
               Versaille style. Rose sits on a divan, with a group of other 
               women arrayed around her. Ruth, the Countess Rothes and Lady 
               Duff-Gordon are taking tea. Rose is silent and still as a 
               porcelain figurine as the conversation washes around her.

                                     RUTH
                         Of course the invitations had to be 
                         sent back to the printers twice. And 
                         the bridesmaids dresses! Let me tell 
                         you what an odyssey that has been...

               TRACKING SLOWLY IN on Rose as Ruth goes on.

               REVERSE - ROSE'S POV

               A tableau of MOTHER and DAUGHTER having tea. The four year 
               old girl, wearing white gloves, daintily picking up a cookie. 
               The mother correcting her on her posture, and the way she 
               holds the teacup. The little girl is trying so hard to please, 
               her expression serious. A glimpse of Rose at that age, and 
               we see the relentless conditioning... the pain to becoming 
               an Edwardian geisha.

               ON ROSE

               She calmly and deliberately turns her teacup over, spilling 
               tea all over her dress.

                                     ROSE
                         Oh, look what I've done.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. TITANIC - DAY

               TITANIC STEAMS TOWARD US, in the dusk light, as if lit by 
               the embers of a giant fire. As the ship looms, FILLING FRAME, 
               we push in on the bow. Jack is there, right at the apex of 
               the bow railing, his favorite spot. He closes his eyes, 
               letting the chill wind clear his head.

               Jack hears her voice, behind him...

                                     ROSE
                         Hello, Jack.

               He turns and she is standing there.

                                     ROSE
                         I changed my mind.

               He smiles at her, his eyes drinking her in. Her cheeks are 
               red with the chill wind, and her eyes sparkle. Her hair blows 
               wildly about her face.

                                     ROSE
                         Fabrizio said you might be up --

                                     JACK
                         Sssshh. Come here.

               He puts his hands on her waist. As if he is going to kiss 
               her.

                                     JACK
                         Close your eyes.

               She does, and he turns her to face forward, the way the ship 
               is going. He presses her gently to the rail, standing right 
               behind her. Then he takes her two hands and raises them until 
               she is standing with her arms outstetched on each side. Rose 
               is going along with him. When he lowers his hands, her arms 
               stay up... like wings.

                                     JACK
                         Okay. Open them.

               Rose gasps. There is nothing in her field of vision but water. 
               It's like there is no ship under them at all, just the two 
               of them soaring. The Atlantic unrolls toward her, a hammered 
               copper shield under a dusk sky. There is only the wind, and 
               the hiss of the water 50 feel below.

                                     ROSE
                         I'm flying!

               She leans forward, arching her back. He puts his hands on 
               her waist to steady her.

                                     JACK
                              (singing softly)
                         Come Josephine in my flying machine...

               Rose closes her eyes, feeling herself floating weightless 
               far above the sea. She smiles dreamily, then leans back, 
               gently pressing her back against his chest. He pushes forward 
               slightly against her.

               Slowly he raises his hands, arms outstretched, and they meet 
               hers... fingertips gently touching. Then their fingers 
               intertwine. Moving slowly, their fingers caress through and 
               around each other like the bodies of two lovers.

               Jack tips his face forward into her blowing hair, letting 
               the scent of her wash over him, until his cheek is against 
               her ear.

               Rose turns her head until her lips are near his. She lowers 
               her arms, turning further, until she finds his mouth with 
               hers. He wraps his arms around her from behind, and they 
               kiss like this with her head turned and tilted back, 
               surrendering to him, to the emotion, to the inevitable. They 
               kiss, slowly and tremulously, and then with building passion.

               Jack and the ship seem to merge into one force of power and 
               optimism, lifting her, buoying her forward on a magical 
               journey, soaring onward into a night without fear.

               IN THE CROW'S NEST, high above and behind them, lookout 
               FREDERICK FLEET nudges his mate, REGINALD LEE, pointing down 
               at the figures in the bow.

                                     FLEET
                         Wish I had those bleedin' binoculars.

               JACK AND ROSE

               Embracing at the bow rail, DISSOLVE SLOWLY AWAY, leaving the 
               ruined bow of the WRECK --

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. KELDYSH IMAGING SHACK

               OLD ROSE blinks, seeming to come back to the present. She 
               sees the wreck on the screen, the sad ghost ship deep in the 
               abyss.

                                     ROSE
                         That was the last time Titanic ever 
                         saw daylight.

               Brock Lovett changes the tape in the minicassette recorder.

                                     BROCK
                         So we're up to dusk on the night of 
                         the sinking. Six hours to go.

                                     BODINE
                         Don't you love it? There's Smith, 
                         he's standing there with the iceberg 
                         warning in his fucking hand...
                              (remembering Rose)
                         ...excuse me... in his hand, and 
                         he's ordering more speed.

                                     BROCK
                         26 years of experience working against 
                         him. He figures anything big enough 
                         to sink the ship they're going to 
                         see in time to turn. But the ship's 
                         too big, with too small a rudder... 
                         it can't corner worth shit. Everything 
                         he knows is wrong.

               Rose is ignoring this conversation. She has the art-nouveau 
               comb with the jade butterfly on the handle in her hands, 
               turning it slowly. She is watching a monitor, which shows 
               the ruins of Suite B-52/56. PUSH IN until the image fills 
               frame.

                                                                TRANSITION:

               INT. ROSE'S SUITE

               ...1912. Like in a dream the beautiful woodwork and satin 
               upholstery emerge from the rusted ruin. Jack is overwhelmed 
               by the opulence of the room. He sets his sketchbook and 
               drawing materials on the marble table.

                                     ROSE
                         Will this light do? Don't artists 
                         need good light?

                                     JACK
                              (bad French accent)
                         Zat is true, I am not used to working 
                         in such 'orreeble conditions.
                              (seeing the paintings)
                         Hey... Monet!

               He crouches next to the paintings stacked against the wall.

                                     JACK
                         Isn't he great... the use of color? 
                         I saw him once... through a hole in 
                         this garden fence in Giverny.

               She goes into the adjoining walk-in wardrobe closet. He sees 
               her go to the safe and start working the combination. He's 
               fascinated.

                                     ROSE
                         Cal insist on lugging this thing 
                         everywhere.

                                     JACK
                         Should I be expecting him anytime 
                         soon?

                                     ROSE
                         Not as long as the cigars and brandy 
                         hold out.

               CLUNK! She unlocks the safe. Glancing up, she meets his eyes 
               in the mirror behind the safe. She opens it and removes the 
               necklace, then holds it out to Jack who takes it nervously.

                                     JACK
                         What is it? A sapphire?

                                     ROSE
                         A diamond. A very rare diamond, called 
                         the Heart of the Ocean.

               Jack gazes at wealth beyond his comprehension.

                                     ROSE
                         I want you to draw me like your French 
                         girl. Wearing this.
                              (she smiles at him)
                         Wearing only this.

               He looks up at her, surprised, and we...

                                                                    CUT TO:

               ROSE'S BEDROOM

               ON THE BUTTERFLY COMB as Rose draws it out of her hair. She 
               shakes her head and her hair falls free around her shoulders.

               IN THE SITTING ROOM

               Jack is laying out his pencils like surgical tools. His 
               sketchbook is open and ready. He looks up as she comes into 
               the room, wearing a silk kimono.

                                     ROSE
                         The last thing I need is another 
                         picture of me looking like a china 
                         doll. As a paying customer, I expect 
                         to get what I want.

               She hands him a dime and steps back, parting the kimono. The 
               blue stone lies on her creamy breast. Her heart is pounding 
               as she slowly lowers the robe.

               Jake looks so stricken, it is almost comical. The kimono 
               drops to the floor (this is all in cuts, lyrical).

                                     ROSE
                         Tell me when it looks right to you.

               She poses on the divan, settling like a cat into the position 
               we remember from the drawing... almost.

                                     JACK
                         Uh... just bend your left leg a little 
                         and... and lower your head. Eyes to 
                         me. That's it.

               Jack starts to sketch. He drops his pencil and she stifles a 
               laugh.

                                     ROSE
                         I believe you are blushing, Mr. Big 
                         Artiste. I can't imagine Monsieur 
                         Monet blushing.

                                     JACK
                              (sweating)
                         He does landscapes.

               TIGHT ON JACK as his eyes come up to look at her over the 
               top edge of his sketchpad. We have seen this image of him 
               before, in her memory. It is an image she will carry the 
               rest of her life.

               Despite his nervousness, he draws with sure strokes, and 
               what emerges is the best thing he has ever done. Her pose is 
               languid, her hands beautiful, and her eyes radiate her energy.

               PUSH SLOWLY IN ON ROSE'S FACE...

                                                                TRANSITION:

               INT. KELDYSH / IMAGING SHACK

               MATCH DISSOLVE/MORPH to Rose, 101 years old. Only her eyes 
               are the same.

                                     OLD ROSE
                         My heart was pounding the whole time. 
                         It was the most erotic moment of my 
                         life... up till then at least.

                                                            CUT TO REVERSE:

               A semicircle of listeners staring in rapt, frozen silence. 
               The story of Jack and Rose has finally and completely grabbed 
               them.

                                     BODINE
                         What, uh... happened next?

                                     OLD ROSE
                              (smiling)
                         You mean, did we "do it"?

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. ROSE AND CAL'S SUITE - NIGHT

               BACK TO 1912. Jack is signing the drawing. Rose, wearing her 
               kimono again, is leaning on his shoulder, watching.

                                     OLD ROSE (V.O.)
                         Sorry to disappoint you Mr. Bodine.

               Rose gazes at the drawing. He has X-rayed her soul.

                                     ROSE
                         Date it, Jack. I want to always 
                         remember this night.

               He does: 4/14/1912. Rose meanwhile scribbles a note on a 
               piece of Titanic stationary. We don't see what it says. She 
               accepts the drawing from him, and crosses to the safe in the 
               wardrobe.

               She puts the diamond back in the safe, placing the drawing 
               and the note on top of it. Closes the door with a CLUNK!

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. FIRST CLASS SMOKING ROOM - NIGHT

               Lovejoy enters from the Palm Court through the revolving 
               door and crosses the room toward Hockley. A fire is blazing 
               in the marble fireplace, and the usual fatcats are playing 
               cards, drinking and talking. Cal sees Lovejoy and detaches 
               from his group, coming to him.

                                     LOVEJOY
                         None of the stewards have seen her.

                                     CAL
                              (low but forceful)
                         This is ridiculous, Lovejoy. Find 
                         her.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. ATLANTIC - NIGHT

               TITANIC glides across an unnatural sea, black and calm as a 
               pool of oil. The ships lights are mirrored almost perfectly 
               in the black water. The sky is brilliant with stars. A meteor 
               traces a bright line across the heavens.

               ON THE BRIDGE

               Captain Smith peers out at the blackness ahead of the ship. 
               QUARTERMASTER HITCHINS brings him a cup of hot tea with lemon. 
               It steams in the bitter cold of the open bridge. Second 
               Officer Lightoller is next to him, staring out at the sheet 
               of black glass the Atlantic has become.

                                     LIGHTOLLER
                         I don't think I've ever seen such a 
                         flat calm, in 24 years at sea.

                                     SMITH
                         Yes, like a mill pond. Not a breath 
                         of wind.

                                     LIGHTOLLER
                         It's make the bergs harder to see, 
                         with no breaking water at the base.

                                     SMITH
                         Mmmmm. Well, I'm off. Maintain speed 
                         and heading, Mr. Lightoller.

                                     LIGHTOLLER
                         Yes sir.

                                     SMITH
                         And wake me, of course, if anything 
                         becomes in the slightest degree 
                         doubtful.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. ROSE AND CAL'S SUITE

               Rose, fully dressed now, returns to the sitting room. They 
               hear a key in the lock. Rose takes Jack's hand and leads him 
               silently through the bedrooms. Lovejoy enters by the sitting 
               room door.

                                     LOVEJOY
                         Miss Rose? Hello?

               He hears a door opening and goes through Cal's room toward 
               hers.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. CORRIDOR OUTSIDE SUITE

               Rose and Jack come out of her stateroom, closing the door. 
               She leads him quickly along the corridor toward the B deck 
               foyer. They are halfway across the open space when the sitting 
               room door opens in the corridor and Lovejoy comes out. The 
               valet sees Jack with Rose and hustles after them.

                                     ROSE
                         Come on!

               She and Jack break into a run, surprising the few ladies and 
               gentlemen about. Rose leads him past the stairs to the bank 
               of elevators. They run into one, shocking the hell out of 
               the OPERATOR.

                                     ROSE
                         Take us down. Quickly, quickly!

               The Operator scrambles to comply. Jack even helps him close 
               the steel gate. Lovejoy runs up as the lift starts to descend. 
               He slams one hand on the bars of the gate. Rose makes a very 
               rude and unladylike gesture, and laughs as Lovejoy disappears 
               above. The Operator gapes at her.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. E-DECK FOYER / ELEVATORS

               Lovejoy emerges from another lift and runs to the one Jack 
               and Rose were in. The Operator is just closing the gate to 
               go back up. Lovejoy runs around the bank of elevators and 
               scans the foyer... no Jack and Rose. He tries the stairs 
               going down to F-Deck.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. F-DECK CORRIDORS / FAN ROOM

               A functional space, with access to a number of machine spaces 
               (fan rooms, boiler uptakes). Jack and Rose are leaning against 
               a wall, laughing.

                                     JACK
                         Pretty tough for a valet, this fella.

                                     ROSE
                         He's an ex-Pinkerton. Cal's father 
                         hired him to keep Cal out of 
                         trouble... to make sure he always 
                         got back to the hotel with his wallet 
                         and watch, after some crawl through 
                         the less reputable parts of town...

                                     JACK
                         Kinda like we're doin' right now -- 
                         uh oh!

               Lovejoy has spotted them from a cross-corridor nearby. He 
               charges toward them. Jack and Rose run around a corner into 
               a blind alley. There is one door, marked "CREW ONLY", and 
               Jack flings it open.

               They enter a roaring RAN ROOM, with no way out but a ladder 
               going down. Jack latches the deadbolt on the door, and Lovejoy 
               slams against it a moment later. Jack grins at Rose, pointing 
               to the ladder.

                                     JACK
                         After you, m'lady.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. BOILER ROOM FIVE AND SIX

               Jack and Rose come down the escape ladder and look around in 
               amazement. It is like a vision of hell itself, with the 
               roaring furnaces and black figures moving in the smoky glow. 
               They run the length of the boiler room, dodging amazed 
               stokers, and trimmers with their wheelbarrows of coal.

                                     JACK
                              (shouting over the 
                              din)
                         Carry on! Don't mind us!

               They run through the open watertight door into BOILER ROOM 
               SIX. Jack pulls her through the fiercely hot alley between 
               two boilers and they wind up in the dark, out of sight of 
               the working crew. Watching from the shadows, they see the 
               stokers working in the hellish glow, shovelling coal into 
               the insatiable maws of the furnaces. The whole place thunders 
               with the roar of the fires.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. FIRST CLASS SMOKING ROOM

               Amid unparalleled luxury, Cal sits at a card game, sipping 
               brandy.

                                     COLONEL GRACIE
                         We're going like hell I tell you. I 
                         have fifty dollars that says we make 
                         it into New York Tuesday night!

               Cal looks at his gold pocket watch, and scowls, not listening.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. BOILER ROOM SIX

               The furnaces roar, silhouetting the glistening stokers. Jack 
               kisses Rose's face, tasting the sweat trickling down from 
               her forehead. They kiss passionately in the steamy, pounding 
               darkness.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. HOLD #2

               Jack and Rose enter and run laughing between the rows of 
               stacked cargo. She hugs herself against the cold, after the 
               dripping heat of the boiler room.

               They come upon William Carter's brand new RENAULT touring 
               car, lashing down to a pallet. It looks like a royal coach 
               from a fairy tale, its brass trim and headlamps nicely set 
               off by its deep burgundy color.

               Rose climbs into the plushly upholstered back seat, acting 
               very royal. There are cut crystals bud vases on the walls 
               back there, each containing a rose. Jack jumps into the 
               driver's seat, enjoying the feel of the leather and wood.

                                     JACK
                         Where to, Miss?

                                     ROSE
                         To the stars.

               ON JACK

               As her hands come out of the shadows and pull him over the 
               seat into the back. He lands next to her, and his breath 
               seems loud in the quiet darkness. He looks at her and she is 
               smiling. It is the moment of truth.

                                     JACK
                         Are you nervous?

                                     ROSE
                         Au contraire, mon cher.

               He strokes her face, cherishing her. She kisses his artist's 
               fingers.

                                     ROSE
                         Put your hands on me Jack.

               He kisses her, and she slides down in the seat under his 
               welcome weight.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. WIRELESS ROOM

               A BRILLIANT ARC OF ELECTRICITY fills frame -- the sparks gap 
               of the Marconi instrument as SENIOR WIRELESS OPERATOR JACK 
               PHILLIPS (24) rapidly keys out a message. Junior Operator 
               Bride looks through the huge stack of outgoing messages 
               swamping them.

                                     BRIDE
                         Look at this one, he wants his private 
                         train to meet him. La dee da.
                              (slaps them down)
                         We'll be up all bloody night on this 
                         lot.

               Phillips start to receive an incoming message from a nearby 
               ship, the Leyland freighter CALIFORNIAN, which jams his 
               outgoing signal. At such close range, the beeps are deafening.

                                     PHILLIPS
                         Christ! It's that idiot on the 
                         Californian.

               Cursing, Phillips furiously keys a rebuke.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. / EXT. WIRELESS SHACK / FREIGHTER CALIFORNIAN

               Wireless Operator CYRIL EVANS pulls his earphone off his ear 
               as the Titanic's spark deafens him. He translates the message 
               for THIRD OFFICER GROVES.

                                     EVANS
                         Stupid bastard. I try to warn him 
                         about the ice, and he says "Keep 
                         out. Shut up. I'm working Cape Race."

                                     GROVES
                         Now what's he sending?

                                     EVANS
                         "No seasickness. Poker business good. 
                         Al". Well that's it for me. I'm 
                         shutting down.

               As Evans wearily switches off his generator, Groves goes out 
               on deck. PAN OFF him to reveal the ship is stopped fifty 
               yards from the edge of a field of pack ice and icebergs 
               stretching as far as the eye can see.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. OCEAN / TITANIC

               ON TITANIC

               Steaming hellbent through the darkness, hurling up white 
               water at the bows. The bow comes straight at us, until the 
               bow wave WIPES THE FRAME --

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. HOLD #2

               PUSHING IN on the rear window of the Renault, which is 
               completely fogged up. Rose's hand comes up and slams against 
               the glass for a moment, making a handprint in the veil of 
               condensation.

               INSIDE THE CAR

               Jack's overcoat is like a blanket over them. It stirs and 
               Rose pulls it down. They are huddled under it, intertwined, 
               still mostly clothed. Their faces are flushed and they look 
               at each other wonderingly. She puts her hand on his face, as 
               if making sure he is real.

                                     ROSE
                         You're trembling.

                                     JACK
                         It's okay. I'm alright.

               He lays his cheek against her chest.

                                     JACK
                         I can feel your heart beating.

               She hugs his head to her chest, and just holds on for dear 
               life.

                                     OLD ROSE (V.O.)
                         Well, I wasn't the first teenage 
                         girl to get seduced in the backseat 
                         of a car, and certainly not the last, 
                         by several million. He had such fine 
                         hands, artists' hands, but strong 
                         too... roughened by work. I remember 
                         their touch even now.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. ATLANTIC / TITANIC - NIGHT

               The bow sweeps under us, and the CAMERA CLIMBS toward the 
               foremast and the tiny half-cylinder of the crow's nest, which 
               grows as we push in on lookouts Fleet and Lee. They are 
               stamping their feet and swinging their arms, trying to keep 
               warm in the 22 knot freezing wind, which whips capor of their 
               breath away behind.

                                     FLEET
                         You can smell ice, you know, when 
                         it's near.

                                     LEE
                         Bollocks.

                                     FLEET
                         Well I can.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. BOILER ROOM SIX

               Without hearing the words over the roar of the furnaces, we 
               see stokers telling TWO STEWARDS which way Rose and Jack 
               went. The stewards move off toward the forward holds.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. CAL AND ROSE'S SUITE

               Cal stands at the open safe. He stares at the drawing of 
               Rose and his face clenches with fury. He reads the not again: 
               "DARLING, NOW YOU CAN KEEP US BOTH LOCKED IN YOUR SAFE, ROSE".

               Lovejoy, standing behind him, looks over his shoulder at the 
               drawing. Cal crumples Rose's note, then takes the drawing in 
               both hands as if to rip it in half. He tenses to do it, then 
               stops himself.

                                     CAL
                         I have a better idea.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. HOLD #2 - NIGHT

               The two stewards enter. They have electric torches and play 
               the beams around the hold. They spot the Renault with its 
               fogged up rear window and approach it slowly.

               FROM INSIDE

               We see the torch light up Rose's passionate handprint, still 
               there on the fogged up glass. One steward whips open the 
               door.

                                     STEWARD
                         Got yer!

               REVERSE:

               The back seat is empty.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. FORWARD WELL DECK AND CROW'S NEST - NIGHT

               Rose and Jack, fully dressed, come through a crew door onto 
               the deck. They can barely stand, they are laughing so hard.

               UP ABOVE THEM, IN THE CROW'S NEST, lookout Fleet hears the 
               disturbance below and looks around and back down to the well 
               deck, where he can see two figures embracing.

               Jack and Rose stand in each others arms. Their breath clouds 
               around them in the now freezing air, but they don't even 
               feel the cold.

                                     ROSE
                         When this ship docks, I'm getting 
                         off with you.

                                     JACK
                         This is crazy.

                                     ROSE
                         I know. It doesn't make any sense. 
                         That's why I trust it.

               Jack pulls her to him and kisses her fiercely.

               IN THE CROW'S NEST

               Fleet nudges Lee.

                                     FLEET
                         Cor... look at that, would ya.

                                     LEE
                         They're a bloody sight warmer than 
                         we are.

                                     FLEET
                         Well if that's what it takes for us 
                         two to get warm, I'd rather not, if 
                         it's all the same.

               They both have a good laugh at that one. It is Fleet whose 
               expression falls first. Glancing forward again, he does a 
               double take. The color drains out of his face.

               FLEET'S POV

               A massive iceberg right in their path, 500 yards out.

                                     FLEET
                         Bugger me!!

               Fleet reaches past Lee and rings the lookout bell three times, 
               then grabs the telephone, calling the bridge. He waits 
               precious seconds for it to be picket up, never taking his 
               eyes off the black mass ahead.

                                     FLEET
                         Pick up, ya bastard.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. / EXT. BRIDGE

               Inside the enclosed wheelhouse, SIXTH OFFICER MOODY walks 
               unhurriedly to the telephone, picking it up.

                                     FLEET (V.O.)
                         Is someone there?

                                     MOODY
                         Yes. What do you see?

                                     FLEET
                         Iceberg right ahead!

                                     MOODY
                         Thank you.
                              (hangs up, calls to 
                              Murdoch)
                         Iceberg right ahead!

               Murdoch sees it and rushes to the engine room telegraph. 
               While signaling "FULL SPEED ASTERN" he yells to Quartermaster 
               Hitchins, who is at the wheel.

                                     MURDOCH
                         Hard a' starboard.

                                     MOODY
                              (standing behind 
                              Hitchins)
                         Hard a' starboard. The helm is hard 
                         over, sir.

               CRASH SEQUENCE / SERIES OF CUTS:

               CHIEF ENGINEER BELL is just checking the soup he has warming 
               on a steam manifold when the engine telegraph clangs, then 
               goes... incredibly... to FULL SPEED ASTERN. He and the other 
               ENGINEERS just stare at it a second, unbelieving. Then Bell 
               reacts.

                                     BELL
                         Full astern! FULL ASTERN!!

               The engineers and greasers like madmen to close steam valves 
               and start braking the mighty propeller shafts, big as Sequias, 
               to a stop.

               IN BOILER ROOM SIX

               Leading Stoker FREDERICK BARRETT is standing with 2nd Engineer 
               JAMES HESKETH when the red warning light and "STOP" indicator 
               come on.

                                     BARRETT
                         Shut all dampers! Shut 'em!!

               FROM THE BRIDGE

               Murdoch watches the burg growing... straight ahead. The bow 
               finally starts to come left (since the ship turns the reverse 
               of the helm setting).

               Murdoch's jaw clenches as the bow turns with agonizing 
               slowness. He holds his breath as the horrible physics play 
               out.

               IN THE CROW'S NEST

               Frederick Fleet braces himself.

               THE BOW OF THE SHIP

               Thunders right at CAMERA and --

               KRUUUNCH!! The ship hits the berg on its starboard bow.

               UNDERWATER

               We see the ice smashing in the steel hull plates. The iceberg 
               bumps and scrapes along the side of the ship. Rivets pop as 
               the steel plate of the hull flexes under the load.

               IN #2 HOLD

               The two stewards stagger as the hull buckles in four feet 
               with a sound like THUNDER. Like a sledgehammer beating along 
               outside the ship, the berg splits the hull plates and the 
               sea pours in, sweeping them off their feet. The icy water 
               swirls around the Renault as the men scramble for the stairs.

               ON G-DECK

               Forward Fabrizio is tossed in his bunk by the impact. He 
               hears a sound like the greatly amplified squeal of a skate 
               on ice.

               IN BOILER ROOM SIX

               Barret and Hesketh stagger as they hear the ROLLING THUNDER 
               of the collision. They see the starboard side of the ship 
               buckle in toward them and are almost swept off their feet by 
               a rush of water coming in about two feet above the floor.

               ON THE FORWARD WELL DECK

               Jack and Rose break their kiss and look up in astonishment 
               as the berg sails past, blocking out the sky like a mountain. 
               Fragments break off it and crash down onto the deck, and 
               they have to jump back to avoid flying chunks of ice.

               ON THE BRIDGE

               Murdoch rings the watertight door alarm. He quickly throws 
               the switch that closes them.

                                     MURDOCH
                         Hard a' port!

               Judging the berg to be amidships, he is trying to clear the 
               stern.

               BARRETT AND HESKETH

               Hear the DOOR ALARM and scramble through the swirling water 
               to the watertight door between Boiler Rooms 6 and 5. The 
               room is full of water vapor as the cold sea strikes the red 
               hot furnaces. Barrett yells to the stokers scrambling through 
               the door as it comes down like a slow guillotine.

                                     BARRETT
                         Go Lads! Go! Go!

               He dives through into Boiler Room 5 just before the door 
               rumbles down with a CLANG.

               JACK AND ROSE

               Rush to the starboard rail in time to see the berg moving 
               aft down the side of the ship.

               In his stateroom, surrounded by piles of plans while making 
               notes in his ever-present book, Andrews looks up at the sound 
               of a cut-crystal light fixture tinkling like a windchime.

               He feels the shudder run through the ship. And we see it in 
               his face. Too much of his soul is in this great ship for him 
               not to feel its mortal wound.

               IN THE FIRST CLASS SMOKING ROOM

               Gracie watches his highball vibrating on the table.

               IN THE PALM COURT

               With its high arched windows, Molly Brown holds up her drink 
               to a passing waiter.

                                     MOLLY
                         Hey, can I get some ice here, please?

               Silently, a moving wall of ice fills the window behind her. 
               She doesn't see it. It disappears astern.

               IN THE CROW'S NEST

               Fleet turns to his Lee...

                                     FLEET
                         Oy, mate... that was a close shave.

                                     LEE
                         Smell ice, can you? Bleedin' Christ!

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. / EXT. BRIDGE

               CLOSE ON MURDOCH

               The alarm bells still clatter mindlessly, seeming to reflect 
               his inner state. He is in shock, unable to get a grip on 
               what just happened. He just ran the biggest ship in history 
               into an iceberg on its maiden voyage.

                                     MURDOCH
                              (stiffly, to Moody)
                         Note the time. Enter it in the log.

               Captain Smith rushes out of his cabin onto the bridge, tucking 
               in his shirt.

                                     SMITH
                         What was that, Mr. Murdoch?

                                     MURDOCH
                         An iceberg, sir. I put her hard a' 
                         starboard and run the engines full 
                         astern, but it was too close. I tried 
                         to port around it, but she hi... and 
                         I --

                                     SMITH
                         Close the emergency doors.

                                     MURDOCH
                         The doors are closed.

               Together they rush out onto the starboard wing, and Murdoch 
               points. Smith looks into the darkness aft, then wheels around 
               to FOURTH OFFICER BOHALL.

                                     SMITH
                         Find the Carpenter and get him to 
                         sound the ship.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. G-DECK FORWARD

               In steerage, Fabrizio comes out into the hall to see what's 
               going on. He sees dozens of rats running toward him in the 
               corridor, fleeing the flooding bow. Fabrizio jumps aside as 
               the rats run by.

                                     FABRIZIO
                         Ma -- che cazzo!

               IN HIS STATEROOM

               Tommy gets out of his top bunk in the dark and drops down to 
               the floor. SPLASH!!

                                     TOMMY
                         Cor!! What in hell?!

               He snaps on the light. The floor is covered with 3 inches of 
               freezing water, and more coming in. He pulls the door open, 
               and steps out into the corridor, which is flooded. Fabrizio 
               is running toward him, yelling something in Italian. Tommy 
               and Fabrizio start pounding on doors, getting everybody up 
               and out. The alarm spreads in several languages.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. FIRST CLASS CORRIDOR / A-DECK

               A couple of people have come out into the corridor in robes 
               and slippers. A STEWARD hurries along, reassuring them.

                                     WOMAN
                         Why have the engines stopped? I felt 
                         a shudder?

                                     STEWARD #1
                         I shouldn't worry, m'am. We've likely 
                         thrown a propeller blade, that's the 
                         shudder you felt. May I bring you 
                         anything?

               THOMAS ANDREWS brushes past them, walking fast and carrying 
               an armload of rolled up ship's plans.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. FORWARD WELL DECK

               Jack and Rose are leaning over the starboard rail, looking 
               at the hull of the ship.

                                     JACK
                         Looks okay. I don't see anything.

                                     ROSE
                         Could it have damaged the ship?

                                     JACK
                         It didn't seem like much of a bump. 
                         I'm sure we're okay.

               Behind them a couple of steerage guys are kicking the ice 
               around the deck, laughing.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. STEERAGE FORWARD

               Fabrizio and Tommy are in a crowd of steerage men clogging 
               the corridors, heading aft away from the flooding. Many of 
               them have grabbed suitcases and duffel bags, some of which 
               are soaked.

                                     TOMMY
                         If this is the direction the rats 
                         were runnin', it's good enough for 
                         me.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. CORRIDOR ON B DECK

               Bruce Ismay, dressed in pajamas under the topcoat, hurries 
               down the corridor, headed for the bridge. An officious steward 
               named BARNES comes along the other direction, getting the 
               few concerned passengers back into their rooms.

                                     STEWARD BARNES
                         There's no cause for alarm. Please, 
                         go back to your rooms.

               He is stopped in his tracks by Cal and Lovejoy.

                                     STEWARD BARNES
                         Please, sir. There's no emergency --

                                     CAL
                         Yes there is, I have been robbed. 
                         Now get the Master at Arms. Now you 
                         moron!

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. BRIDGE / CHARTROOM

               CLOSEUP OF CAPTAIN SMITH studying the commutator.

               He turns to Andrews, standing behind him.

                                     SMITH
                         A five degree list in less than ten 
                         minutes.

               SHIP'S CARPENTER JOHN HUTCHINSON enters behind him, out of 
               breath and clearly unnerved.

                                     HUTCHINSON
                         She's making water fast... in the 
                         forepeak tank and the forward holds, 
                         in boiler room six.

               Ismay enters, his movements quick with anger and frustration. 
               Smith glances at him with annoyance.

                                     ISMAY
                         Why have we stopped?

                                     SMITH
                         We've struck ice.

                                     ISMAY
                         Well, do you think the ship is 
                         seriously damaged?

                                     SMITH
                              (glaring)
                         Excuse me.

               Smith pushes past him, with Andrews and Hutchinson in tow.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. BOILER ROOM

               Strokers and firemen are struggling to draw the fires. They 
               are working in waist deep water churning around as it flows 
               into the boiler room, ice cold and swirling with grease from 
               the machinery. Chief Engineer Bell comes partway down the 
               ladder and shouts.

                                     BELL
                         That's it, lads. Get the hell up!

               They scramble up the escape ladders.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. B-DECK FORWARD / WELL DECK

               The gentlemen, now joined by another man, leans on the forward 
               rail watching the steerage men playing soccer with chunks of 
               ice.

                                     GENTLEMAN
                         I guess it's nothing too serious. 
                         I'm going back to my cabin to read.

               A 20ish YALE MAN pops through the door wearing a topcoat 
               over pajamas.

                                     YALEY
                         Say, did I miss the fun?

               Rose and Jack come up the steps from the well deck, which 
               are right next to the three men. They stare as the couple 
               climbs over the locked gate.

               A moment later Captain Smith rounds the corner, followed by 
               Andrews and Carpenter Hutchinson. They have come down from 
               the bridge by the outside stairs. The three men, their faces 
               grim, crush right past Jack and Rose. Andrews barely glances 
               at her.

                                     SMITH
                         Can you shore up?

                                     HUTCHINSON
                         Not unless the pumps get ahead.

               The inspection party goes down the stairs to the well deck.

                                     JACK
                              (low, to her)
                         It's bad.

                                     ROSE
                         We have to tell Mother and Cal.

                                     JACK
                         Now it's worse.

                                     ROSE
                         Come with me, Jack. I jump, you 
                         jump... Right?

                                     JACK
                         Right.

               Jack follows Rose through the door inside the ship.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. B-DECK FOYER / CORRIDOR

               Jack and Rose cross the foyer, entering the corridor. Lovejoy 
               is waiting for them in the hall as they approach the room.

                                     LOVEJOY
                         We've been looking for you miss.

               Lovejoy follows and, unseen, moves close behind Jack and 
               smoothly slips the diamond necklace into the pocket of his 
               overcoat.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. ROSE AND CAL'S SUITE

               Cal and Ruth wait in the sitting room, along with the Master 
               at Arms and two stewards (Steward #1 and Barnes). Silence as 
               Rose and Jack enter. Ruth closes her robe at her throat when 
               she sees Jack.

                                     ROSE
                         Something serious has happened.

                                     CAL
                         That's right. Two things dear to me 
                         have disappeared this evening. Now 
                         that one is back...
                              (he looks from Rose 
                              to Jack)
                         ...I have a pretty good idea where 
                         to find the other.
                              (to Master at Arms)
                         Search him.

               The Master at Arms steps up to Jack.

                                     MASTER AT ARMS
                         Coat off, mate.

               Lovejoy pulls at Jack's coat and Jack shakes his head in 
               dismay, shrugging out of it. The Master at Arms pats him 
               down.

                                     JACK
                         This is horseshit.

                                     ROSE
                         Cal, you can't be serious! We're in 
                         the middle of an emergency and you --

               Steward Barnes pulls the Heart of the Ocean out of the pocket 
               of Jack's coat.

                                     STEWARD BARNES
                         Is this it?

               Rose is stunned. Needless to say, so is Jack.

                                     CAL
                         That's it.

                                     MASTER AT ARMS
                         Right then. Now don't make a fuss.

               He starts to handcuff Jack.

                                     JACK
                         Don't you believe it, Rose. Don't!

                                     ROSE
                              (uncertain)
                         He couldn't have.

                                     CAL
                         Of course he could. Easy enough for 
                         a professional. He memorized the 
                         combination when you opened the safe.

               FLASHBACK

               Rose at the safe, looking in the mirror and meeting Jack's 
               eyes as he stands behind her, watching.

                                     ROSE
                         But I was with him the whole time.

                                     CAL
                              (just to her, low and 
                              cold)
                         Maybe he did it while you were putting 
                         your clothes back on.

                                     JACK
                         They put it in my pocket!

                                     LOVEJOY
                              (holding Jack's coat)
                         It's not even your pocket, son.
                              (reading)
                         "Property of A. L. Ryerson".

               Lovejoy shows the coat to the Master at Arms. There is a 
               label inside the collar with the owner's name.

                                     MASTER AT ARMS
                         That was reported stolen today.

                                     JACK
                         I was going to return it! Rose --

               Rose feels utterly betrayed, hurt and confused. She shrinks 
               away from him. He starts shouting to her as Lovejoy and the 
               Master at Arms drag him out into the hall. She can't look 
               him in the eye.

                                     JACK
                         Rose, don't listen to them... I didn't 
                         do this! You know I didn't! You know 
                         it!

               She is devastated. Her mother lays a comforting hand on her 
               shoulder as the tears well up.

                                     RUTH
                         Why do women believe men?

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. MAIL SORTING ROOM / HOLD

               Smith and Andrews come down the steps to the Mail Sorting 
               Room and finds the clerks scrambling to pull mail from the 
               racks. They are furiously hauling wet sacks of mail up from 
               the hold below.

               Andrews climbs part way down the stairs to the hold, which 
               is almost full. Sacks of mail float everywhere. The lights 
               are still on below the surface, casting an eerie glow. The 
               Renault is visible under the water, the brass glinting 
               cheerfully. Andrews looks down as the water covers his shoe, 
               and scrambles back up the stairs.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. BRIDE / CHARTROOM

               Andrews unrolls a big drawing of the ship across the chartroom 
               table. It is a side elevation, showing all the watertight 
               bulkheads. His hands are shaking. Murdoch and Ismay hover 
               behind Andrews and the Captain.

                                     ISMAY
                         When can we get underway, do you 
                         think?

               Smith glares at him and turns his attention to Andrews' 
               drawing. The builder points to it for emphasis as he talks.

                                     ANDREWS
                         Water 14 feet above the keel in ten 
                         minutes... in the forepeak... in all 
                         three holds... and in boiler room 
                         six.

                                     SMITH
                         That's right.

                                     ANDREWS
                         Five compartments. She can stay afloat 
                         with the first four compartments 
                         breached. But not five. Not five. As 
                         she goes down by the head the water 
                         will spill over the tops of the 
                         bulkheads... at E Deck... from one 
                         to the next... back and back. There's 
                         no stopping it.

                                     SMITH
                         The pumps --

                                     ANDREWS
                         The pumps buy you time... but minutes 
                         only. From this moment, no matter 
                         what we do, Titanic will founder.

                                     ISMAY
                         But this ship can't sink!

                                     ANDREWS
                         She is made of iron, sir. I assure 
                         you, she can. And she will. It is a 
                         mathematical certainty.

               Smith looks like he has been gutpunched.

                                     SMITH
                         How much time?

                                     ANDREWS
                         An hour, two at most.

               Ismay reels as his dream turns into his worst nightmare.

                                     SMITH
                         And how many aboard, Mr. Murdoch?

                                     MURDOCH
                         Two thousand two hundred souls aboard, 
                         sir.

               A long beat. Smith turns to his employer.

                                     SMITH
                         I believe you may get your headlines, 
                         Mr. Ismay.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. BOAT DECK

               Andrews is striding along the boat deck, as seamen and 
               officers scurry to uncover the boats. Steam is venting from 
               pipes on the funnels overhead, and the din is horrendous. 
               Speech is difficult adding to the crew's level of 
               disorganization. Andrews sees some men fumbling with the 
               mechanism of one of the Wellin davits and yells to them over 
               the roar of steam.

                                     ANDREWS
                         Turn to the right! Pull the falls 
                         taut before you unchock. Have you 
                         never had a boat drill?

                                     SEAMAN
                         No sir! Not with these new davits, 
                         sir.

               He looks around, disgusted as the crew fumble with the davits, 
               and the tackle for the "falls"... the ropes which are used 
               to lower the boats. A few passengers are coming out on deck, 
               hesitantly in the noise and bitter cold.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. ROSE AND CAL'S SUITE

               From inside the sitting room they can hear knocking and voices 
               in the corridor.

                                     RUTH
                         I had better go dress.

               Ruth exits and Hockley crosses to Rose. He regards her coldly 
               for a moment, then SLAPS her across the face.

                                     CAL
                         It is a little slut, isn't it?

               To Rose the blow is inconsequential compared to the blow her 
               heart has been given. Cal grabs her shoulders roughly.

                                     CAL
                         Look at me, you little --

               There is a loud knock on the door and an urgent voice. The 
               door opens and their steward puts his head in.

                                     STEWARD BARNES
                         Sir, I've been told to ask you to 
                         please put on your lifebelt, and 
                         come up to the boat deck.

                                     CAL
                         Get out. We're busy.

               The steward persists, coming in to get the lifebelts down 
               from the top of a dresser.

                                     STEWARD
                         I'm sorry about the inconvenience, 
                         Mr. Hockley, but it's Captain's 
                         orders. Please dress warmly, it's 
                         quite cold tonight.
                              (he hands a lifebelt 
                              to Rose)
                         Not to worry, miss, I'm sure it's 
                         just a precaution.

                                     CAL
                         This is ridiculous.

               In the corridor outside the stewards are being so polite and 
               obsequious they are conveying no sense of danger whatsoever. 
               However, it's another story in...

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. STEERAGE BERTHING AFT

               BLACKNESS. Then BANG! The door is thrown open and the lights 
               snapped on by a steward. The Cartmell family rouses from a 
               sound sleep.

                                     STEWARD #2
                         Everybody up. Let's go. Put your 
                         lifebelts on.

               IN THE CORRIDOR OUTSIDE

               Another steward is going from door to door along the hall, 
               pouncing and yelling.

                                     STEWARD #2
                         Lifebelts on. Lifebelts on. Everybody 
                         up, come on. Lifebelts on...

               People come out of the doors behind the steward, perplexed. 
               In the foreground a SYRIAN WOMAN asks her husband what was 
               said. He shrugs.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. WIRELESS ROOM

               ON PHILLIPS

               Looking shocked.

                                     PHILLIPS
                         CQD, sir?

                                     SMITH
                         That's right. The distress call. 
                         CQD. Tell whoever responds that we 
                         are going down by the head and need 
                         immediate assistance.

               Smith hurries out.

                                     PHILLIPS
                         Blimey.

                                     BRIDE
                         Maybe you ought to try that new 
                         distress call... S.O.S.
                              (grinning)
                         It may be our only chance to use it.

               Phillips laughs in spite of himself and starts sending 
               history's first S.O.S. Dit dit dit, da da da, dit dit dit... 
               over and over.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. BOAT DECK

               Thomas Andrews looks around in amazement. The deck is empty 
               except for the crew fumbling with the davits. He yells over 
               the roar of the steam to First Officer Murdoch.

                                     ANDREWS
                         Where are all the passengers?

                                     MURDOCH
                         They've all gone back inside. Too 
                         damn cold and noisy for them.

               Andrews feels like he is in a bad dream. He looks at his 
               pocketwatch and heads for the foyer entrance.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. A-DECK FOYER

               A large number of First Class passengers have gathered near 
               the staircase. They are getting indignant about the confusion. 
               Molly Brown snags a passing YOUNG STEWARD.

                                     MOLLY
                         What's doing, sonny? You've got us 
                         all trussed up and now we're cooling 
                         our heels.

               The young steward backs away, actually stumbling on the 
               stairs.

                                     YOUNG STEWARD
                         Sorry, mum. Let me go and find out.

               The jumpy piano rhythm of "Alexander's Ragtime Band" comes 
               out of the first class lounge a few yards away. Band leader 
               WALLACE HARTLEY has assembled some of his men on Captain's 
               orders, to allay panic.

               Hockley's entourage comes up to the A-deck foyer. Cal is 
               carrying the lifebelts, almost as an afterthought. Rose is 
               like a sleepwalker.

                                     CAL
                         It's just the God damned English 
                         doing everything by the book.

                                     RUTH
                         There's no need for language, Mr. 
                         Hockley.
                              (to Trudy)
                         Go back and turn the heater on in my 
                         room, so it won't be too cold when 
                         we get back.

               Thomas Andrews enters, looking around the magnificent room, 
               which he knows is doomed. Rose, standing nearby, sees his 
               heartbroken expression. She walks over to him and Cal goes 
               after her.

                                     ROSE
                         I saw the iceberg, Mr. Andrews. And 
                         I see it in your eyes. Please tell 
                         me the truth.

                                     ANDREWS
                         The ship will sink.

                                     ROSE
                         You're certain?

                                     ANDREWS
                         Yes. In an hour or so... all this... 
                         will be at the bottom of the Atlantic.

                                     CAL
                         My God.

               Now it is Cal's turn to look stunned. The Titanic? Sinking?

                                     ANDREWS
                         Please tell only who you must, I 
                         don't want to be responsible for a 
                         panic. And get to a boat quickly. 
                         Don't wait. You remember what I told 
                         you about the boats?

                                     ROSE
                         Yes, I understand. Thank you.

               Andrews goes off, moving among the passengers and urging 
               them to put on their lifebelts and get to the boats.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. MASTER AT ARMS OFFICE

               Lovejoy and the Master at Arms are handcuffing Jack to a 4" 
               WATER PIPE as a crewman rushes in anxiously and almost blurts 
               to the Master at Arms --

                                     CREWMAN
                         You're wanted by the Purser, sir. 
                         Urgently.

                                     LOVEJOY
                         Go on. I'll keep an eye on him.

               Lovejoy pulls a pearl handled Colt .45 automatic from under 
               his coat. The Master at Arms nods and tosses the handcuff 
               key to Lovejoy, then exits with the crewman. Lovejoy flips 
               the key in the air. Catches it.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. BRIDGE

               Junior Wireless Operator Bride is relaying a message to 
               Captain Smith from the CUNARD LINER CARPATHIA.

                                     BRIDE
                         Carpathia says they're making 17 
                         knots, full steam for them, sir.

                                     SMITH
                         And she's the only one who's 
                         responding?

                                     BRIDE
                         The only one close, sir. She says 
                         they can be here in four hours.

                                     SMITH
                         Four hours!

               The enormity of it hits Smith like a sledgehammer blow.

                                     SMITH
                         Thank you, Bride.

               He turns as Bride exits, and looks out onto the blackness.

                                     SMITH
                              (to himself)
                         My God.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. BOAT DECK - NIGHT

               Lightoller has his boats swung out. He is standing amidst a 
               crowd of uncertain passengers in all states of dress and 
               undress. One first class woman is barefoot. Others are in 
               stockings. The maitre of the restaurant is in top hat and 
               overcoat. Others are still in evening dress, while some are 
               in bathrobes and kimonos. Women are wearing lifebelts over 
               velvet gowns, then topping it with sole stoles. Some brought 
               jewels, others books, even small dogs.

               Lightoller sees Smith walking stiffly toward him and quickly 
               goes to him. He yells into the Captain's ear, through cupped 
               hands, over the roar of the steam...

                                     LIGHTOLLER
                         Hadn't we better get the women and 
                         children into the boats, sir?

               Smith just nods, a bit abstractly. The fire has gone out of 
               him. Lightoller sees the awesome truth in Smith's face.

                                     LIGHTOLLER
                              (to the men)
                         Right! Start the loading. Women and 
                         children!

               The appalling din of escaping steam abruptly cuts off, leaving 
               a sudden unearthly silence in which Lightoller's voice echoes.

               ON WALLACE HARTLEY

               Raising his violin to play.

                                     HARTLEY
                         Number 26. Ready and --

               The band has reassembled just outside the First Class 
               Entrance, port side, near where Lightoller is calling for 
               the boats to be loaded. They strike up a waltz, lively and 
               elegant. The music wafts all over the ship.

                                     LIGHTOLLER
                         Ladies, please. Step into the boat.

               Finally one woman steps across the gap, into the boat, 
               terrified of the drop to the water far below.

                                     WOMAN IN CROWD
                         You watch. They'll put us off in 
                         these silly little boats to freeze, 
                         and we'll all be back on board by 
                         breakfast.

               Cal, Rose and Ruth come out of the doors near the band.

                                     RUTH
                         My brooch, I left my brooch. I must 
                         have it!

               She turns back to go to her room but Cal takes her by the 
               arm, refusing to let her go. The firmness of his hold 
               surprises her.

                                     CAL
                         Stay here, Ruth.

               Ruth sees his expression, and knows fear for the first time.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. STEERAGE BERTHING AFT / CORRIDORS AND STAIRWELL

               It is chaos, with stewards pushing their way through narrow 
               corridors clogged with people carrying suitcases, duffel 
               bags, children. Some have lifebelts on, others don't.

                                     STEWARD #2
                              (to Steward #3)
                         I told the stupid sods no luggage. 
                         Aw, bloody hell!

               He throws up his hand at the sight of a family, loaded down 
               with cases and bags, completely blocking the corridor.

               Fabrizio and Tommy push past the stewards, going the other 
               way. They reach a huge crowd gathered at the bottom of the 
               MAIN 3RD CLASS STAIRWELL. Fabrizio spots Helga with the rest 
               of the Dahl family, standing patiently with suitcases in 
               hand. He reaches her and she grins, hugging him.

               Tommy pushes to where he can see what's holding up the group. 
               There is a steel gate across the top of the stairs, with 
               several stewards and seamen on the other side.

                                     STEWARD
                         Stay calm, please. It's not time to 
                         go up to the boats yet.

               Near Tommy, an IRISHWOMAN stands stoically with two small 
               children and their battered luggage.

                                     LITTLE BOY
                         What are we doing, mummy?

                                     WOMAN
                         We're just waiting, dear. When they 
                         finish putting First Class people in 
                         the boats, they'll be startin' with 
                         us, and we'll want to be all ready, 
                         won't we?

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. STARBOARD SIDE

               Boat 7 is less than half full, with 28 aboard a boat made 
               for 65.

                                     FIRST OFFICER MURDOCH
                         Lower away! By the left and right 
                         together, steady lads!

               The boat lurches as the falls start to pay out through the 
               pulley blocks. The women gasp. The boat descends, swaying 
               and jerking, toward the water 60 feet below. The passengers 
               are terrified.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. / INT. TITANIC HULL AND MASTER AT ARMS OFFICE

               TRACKING along the rows of portholes angling down into the 
               water. Under the surface, they glow green.

               PUSHING IN on one porthole which is half submerged. Inside 
               we see Jack, looking apprehensively at the water rising up 
               the glass.

               INSIDE THE MASTER AT ARMS' OFFICE

               Jack sits chained to the waterpipe, next to the porthole. 
               Lovejoy sits on the edge of a desk. He puts a .45 bullet on 
               the desk and watches it roll across and fall off. He picks 
               up the bullet.

                                     LOVEJOY
                         You know... I believe this ship may 
                         sink.
                              (crosses to Jack)
                         I've been asked to give you this 
                         small token of our appreciation...

               He punches Jack hard in the stomach, knocking the wind out 
               of him.

                                     LOVEJOY
                         Compliments of Mr. Caledon Hockley.

               Lovejoy flips the handcuff key in the air, catches it and 
               puts it in his pocket. He exits. Jack is left gasping, 
               handcuffed to the pipe.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. BOAT DECK / STARBOARD SIDE, FORWARD

               At the stairwell rail on the bridge wing, Fourth Officer 
               Boxhall and Quartermaster Rowe light the first distress 
               rocket. It shoots into the sky and EXPLODES with a thunderclap 
               over the ship, sending out white starbursts which light up 
               the entire deck as they fall.

               WHIP PAN off the starbursts to Ismay. The Managing Director 
               of White Star Line is cracking. Already at the breaking point 
               from his immense guilt, the rocket panics him. He starts 
               shouting at the officers struggling with the falls of BOAT 
               5.

                                     ISMAY
                         There is no time to waste!
                              (yelling and waving 
                              his arms)
                         Lower away! Lower away! Lower away!

               FIFTH OFFICER LOWE, a baby-faced 28, and the youngest officer, 
               looks up from the tangled falls at the madman.

                                     LOWE
                         Get out of the way, you fool!

                                     ISMAY
                         Do you know who I am?

               Lowe, not having a clue nor caring, squares up to Ismay.

                                     LOWE
                         You're a passenger. And I'm a ship's 
                         bloody officer. Now do what you're 
                         told!
                              (turning away)
                         Steady men! Stand by the falls!

                                     ISMAY
                              (numbly, backing away)
                         Yes, quite right. Sorry.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. BOAT DECK / PORT SIDE

               SECOND OFFICER LIGHTOLLER is loading the boat nearest Cal 
               and Rose... Boat 6.

                                     LIGHTOLLER
                         Women and children only! Sorry sir, 
                         no men yet.

               Another rocket bursts overhead, lighting the crowd. Startled 
               faces turn upward. Fear now in the eyes.

               DANIEL MARVIN has his Biograph camera set up, cranking away... 
               hoping to get an exposure off the rocket's light. he has 
               Mary posed in front of the scene at the boats.

                                     MARVIN
                         You're afraid, darling. Scared to 
                         death. That's it!

               Either she suddenly learned to act or she is petrified.

               ROSE watches the farewells taking pace right in front of her 
               as they step closer to the boat. Husbands saying goodbye to 
               wives and children. Lovers and friends parted. Nearby MOLLY 
               is getting a reluctant woman to board the boat.

                                     MOLLY
                         Come on, you heard the man. Get in 
                         the boat, sister.

                                     RUTH
                         Will the lifeboats be seated according 
                         to class? I hope they're not too 
                         crowded --

                                     ROSE
                         Oh, Mother shut up!
                              (Ruth freezes, mouth 
                              open)
                         Don't you understand? The water is 
                         freezing and there aren't enough 
                         boats... not enough by half. Half 
                         the people on this ship are going to 
                         die.

                                     CAL
                         Not the better half.

               PUSH IN ON ROSE'S FACE as it hits her like a thunderbolt. 
               Jack is third class. He doesn't stand a chance. Another rocket 
               bursts overhead, bathing her face in white light.

                                     ROSE
                         You unimaginable bastard.

                                     MOLLY
                         Come on, Ruth, get in the boat. These 
                         are the first class seats right up 
                         here. That's it.

               Molly practically hands her over to Lightoller, then looks 
               around for some other women who might need a push.

                                     MOLLY
                         Come on, Rose. You're next, darlin'.

               Rose steps back, shaking her head.

                                     RUTH
                         Rose, get in the boat!

                                     ROSE
                         Goodbye, mother.

               Ruth, standing in the tippy lifeboat, can do nothing. Cal 
               grabs Rose's arm but she pulls free and walks away through 
               the crowd. Cal catches up to Rose and grabs her again, 
               roughly.

                                     CAL
                         Where are you going? To him? Is that 
                         it? To be a whore to that gutter 
                         rat?

                                     ROSE
                         I'd rather be his whore than your 
                         wife.

               He clenches his jaw and squeezes her arm viciously, pulling 
               her back toward the lifeboat. Rose pulls out a hairpin and 
               jabs him with it. He lets go with a curse and she runs into 
               the crowd.

                                     LIGHTOLLER
                         Lower away!!

                                     RUTH
                         Rose! ROSE!!

                                     MOLLY
                         Stuff a sock in it, would ya, Ruth. 
                         She'll be along.

               The boat lurches downward as the falls are paid out.

               TRACKING WITH ROSE, as she runs through the clusters of 
               people. She looks back and a furious Cal is coming after 
               her. She runs breathlessly up to two proper looking men.

                                     ROSE
                         That man tried to take advantage of 
                         me in the crowd!

               Appalled, they turn to see Cal running toward them. Rose 
               runs on as the two men grab Cal, restraining him. She runs 
               through the First Class entrance.

               Cal breaks free and runs after her. He reaches the entrance, 
               but runs into a knot of people coming out. He pushes rudely 
               through them...

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. BOAT DECK FOYER / STAIRCASE / A-DECK FOYER

               Cal runs in, and down to the landing, pushing past the 
               gentlemen and ladies who are filling up the stairs. He scans 
               the A-deck foyer. Rose is gone.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. OCEAN / TITANIC / BOAT

               The hull of Titanic looms over Boat 6 like a cliff. Its 
               enormous mass is suddenly threatening to those in the tiny 
               boat. Quartermaster Hitchins, at the tiller, wants nothing 
               but to get away from the ship. Unfortunately his two seamen 
               can't row. They flail like a duck with a broken wing.

                                     HITCHINS
                         Keep pulling... away from the ship. 
                         Pull.

                                     MOLLY
                         Ain't you boys ever rowed before? 
                         Here, gimme those oars. I'll show ya 
                         how it's done.

               She climbs over Ruth to get at the oars, stepping on her 
               feet.

               Around them the evacuation is in full swing, with boats in 
               the water, others being lowered.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. MASTER AT ARMS OFFICE / CORRIDOR

               Jack pulls on the pipe with all his strength. It's not 
               budging. He hears gurgling sound. Water pours under the door, 
               spreading rapidly across the floor.

                                     JACK
                         Shit.

               He tries to pull one hand out of the cuffs, working until 
               the skin is raw... no good.

                                     JACK
                         Help!! Somebody!! Can anybody hear 
                         me?!
                              (to himself)
                         This could be bad.

               THE CORRIDOR

               Outside is deserted. Flooded a couple of inches deep. Jack's 
               voice comes faintly through the door, but there is no one to 
               hear it.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. FIRST CLASS CORRIDOR

               Thomas Andrews is opening stateroom doors, checking that 
               people are out.

                                     ANDREWS
                         Anyone in here?

               Rose runs up to him, breathless.

                                     ROSE
                         Mr. Andrews, thank God! Where would 
                         the Master at Arms take someone under 
                         arrest?!

                                     ANDREWS
                         What? You have to get to a boat right 
                         away!

                                     ROSE
                         No! I'll do this with or without 
                         your help, sir. But without will 
                         take longer.

                                     ANDREWS
                              (beat)
                         Take the elevator to the very bottom, 
                         go left, down the crewman's passage, 
                         then make a right.

                                     ROSE
                         Bottom, left, right. I have it.

                                     ANDREWS
                         Hurry, Rose.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. FOYER / ELEVATORS

               Rose runs up as the last Elevator Operator is closing up his 
               lift to leave.

                                     OPERATOR
                         Sorry, miss, lifts are closed --

               Without thinking she grabs him and shoves him back into the 
               lift.

                                     ROSE
                         I'm through with being polite, 
                         goddamnit!! I may never be polite 
                         the rest of my life! Now take me 
                         down!!

               The operator fumbles to close the gate and start the lift.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. OCEAN / BOAT

               Molly and the two seamen are rowing, and they've made it a 
               hundred feet or so. Enough to see that the ship is angled 
               down into the water, with the bow rail less than ten feet 
               above the surface.

                                     MOLLY
                         Come on girls, join in, it'll keep 
                         ya warm. Let's go Ruth. Grab an oar!

               Ruth just stares at the spectacle of the great liner, its 
               rows of lights blazing, slanting down into the sullen black 
               mirror of the Atlantic.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. FIRST CLASS ELEVATOR / CORRIDORS

               Through the wrought iron door of the elevator car Rose can 
               see the decks going past. The lift slows. Suddenly ICE WATER 
               is swirling around her legs. She SCREAMS in surprise. So 
               does the operator.

               The car has landed in a foot of freezing water, shocking the 
               hell out of her. She claws the door open and splashes out, 
               hiking up her floor-length skirt so she can move. The lift 
               goes back up, behind her, as she looks around.

                                     ROSE
                         Left, crew passage.

               She spots it and slogs down the flooded corridor. The place 
               is understandably deserted. She is on her own.

                                     ROSE
                         Right, right... right.

               She turns into a cross-corridor, splashing down the hall. A 
               row of doors on each side.

                                     ROSE
                         Jack? Jaaacckk??

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. MASTER AT ARMS OFFICE / CORRIDOR

               Jack is hopelessly pulling on the pipe again, straining until 
               he turns red. He collapses back on the bench, realizing he's 
               screwed. Then he hears her through the door.

                                     JACK
                         ROSE!! In here!

               IN THE HALL

               Rose hears his voice behind her. She spins and runs back, 
               locating the right door, then pushes it open, creating a 
               small wave.

               She splashes over Jack and puts her arms around him.

                                     ROSE
                         Jack, Jack, Jack... I'm sorry, I'm 
                         so sorry.

               They are so happy to see each other it's embarrassing.

                                     JACK
                         That guy Lovejoy put it in my pocket.

                                     ROSE
                         I know, I know.

                                     JACK
                         See if you can find a key for these. 
                         Try those drawers. It's a little 
                         brass one.

               She kisses his face and hugs him again, then starts to go 
               through the desk.

                                     JACK
                         So... how did you find out I didn't 
                         do it?

                                     ROSE
                         I didn't.
                              (she looks at him)
                         I just realized I already knew.

               They share a look, then she goes back to ransacking the room, 
               searching drawers and cupboards. Jack sees movement out the 
               porthole and looks out.

               A LIFEBOAT hits the surface of the water, seen from below.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. TITANIC / BOAT ONE

               While the seamen detach the falls, Boat One rocks next to 
               the hull. Lucile and Sir Cosmo Duff-Gordon sit with ten others 
               in a boat made for four times that many.

                                     LUCILE
                         I despise small boats. I just know 
                         I'm going to be seasick. I always 
                         get seasick in small boats. Good 
                         Heavens, there's a man down there.

               In a lit porthole beneath the surface she sees Jack looking 
               up at her... a face in a bubble of light under the water.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. MASTER AT ARMS OFFICE

               Rose stops trashing the room, and stands there, breathing 
               hard.

                                     ROSE
                         There's no key in here.

               They look around at the water, now almost two feet deep. 
               Jack has pulled his feet up onto the bench.

                                     JACK
                         You have to go for help.

                                     ROSE
                              (nodding)
                         I'll be right back.

                                     JACK
                         I'll wait here.

               She runs out, looking back at him once from the doorway, 
               then splashes away. Jack looks down at the swirling water.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. STAIRWELL AND CORRIDORS

               Rose splashes down the hall to a stairwell going up to the 
               next deck. She climbs the stairs, her long skirt leaving a 
               trail like a giant snail. The weight of it is really slowing 
               her down. She rips at the buttons and shimmies quickly out 
               of the thing. She bounds up the stairs in her stockings and 
               knee-length slip, to find herself in --

               A LONG CORRIDOR

               Part of the labyrinth of steerage hallways forward. She is 
               alone here. A long groan of stressing metal echoes along the 
               hall as the ship continues to settle. She runs down the hall, 
               unimpeded now.

                                     ROSE
                         Hello? Somebody?!

               She turns a corner and runs along another corridor in a daze. 
               The hall slopes down into water which, shimmers, reflecting 
               the light. The margin of the water creeps toward her. A YOUNG 
               MAN appears, running through the water, sending up geysers 
               of spray. He pelts past her without slowing, his eyes 
               crazed...

                                     ROSE
                         Help me! We need help!

               He doesn't look back. It is like a bad dream. The hull gongs 
               with terrifying sounds.

               The lights flicker and go out, leaving utter darkness. A 
               beat. Then they come back on. She finds herself 
               hyperventilating. That one moment of blackness was the most 
               terrifying of her life.

               A STEWARD runs around the nearest corner, his arms full of 
               lifebelts. He is upset to see someone still in his section. 
               He grabs her forcefully by the arm, pulling her with him 
               like a wayward child.

                                     STEWARD
                         Come on, then, let's get you topside, 
                         miss, that's right.

                                     ROSE
                         Wait. Wait! I need your help! There's --

                                     STEWARD
                         No need for panic, miss. Come along!

                                     ROSE
                         No, let me go! You're going the wrong 
                         way!

               He's not listening. And he won't let her go.

               She SHOUTS in his ear, and when he turns, she punches him 
               squarely in the nose. Shocked, he lets her go and staggers 
               back.

                                     STEWARD
                         To Hell with you!

                                     ROSE
                         See you there, buster!

               The steward runs off, holding his bloody nose. She spits 
               after him. Just the way Jack taught her.

               She turns around, SEES: a glass case with a fire-axe in it. 
               She breaks the glass with a battered suitcase which is lying 
               discarded nearby, and seizes the axe, running back the way 
               she came.

               AT THE STAIRWELL

               She looks down and gasps. The water has flooded the bottom 
               five steps. She goes down and has to crouch to look along 
               the corridor to the room where Jack is trapped.

               Rose plunges into the water, which is up to her waist... and 
               powers forward, holding the axe above her head in two hands. 
               She grimaces at the pain from the literally freezing water.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. MASTER AT ARMS OFFICE

               Jack has climbed up on the bench, and is hugging the 
               waterpipe. Rose wades in, holding the axe above her head.

                                     ROSE
                         Will this work?

                                     JACK
                         We'll find out.

               They are both terrified, but trying to keep panic at bay. He 
               positions the chain connecting the two cuffs, stretching it 
               taut across the steel pipe. The chain is of course very short, 
               and his exposed wrists are on either side of it.

                                     JACK
                         Try a couple practice swings.

               Rose hefts the axe and thunks it into a wooden cabinet.

                                     JACK
                         Now try to hit the same mark again.

               She swings hard and the blade thunks in four inches from the 
               mark.

                                     JACK
                         Okay, that's enough practice.

               He winces, bracing himself as she raises the axe. She has to 
               hit a target about an inch wide with all the force she can 
               muster, with his hands on either side.

                                     JACK
                              (sounding calm)
                         You can do it, Rose. Hit it as hard 
                         as you can, I trust you.

               Jack closes his eyes. So does she.

               The axe comes down. K-WHANG! Rose gingerly opens her eyes 
               looks... Jack is grinning with two separate cuffs.

               Rose drops the axe, all the strength going out of her.

                                     JACK
                         Nice work, there, Paul Bunyan.

               He climbs down into the water next to her. He can't breathe 
               for a second.

                                     JACK
                         Shit! Excuse my French. Ow ow ow, 
                         that is cold! Come on, let's go.

               They wade out into the hall. Rose starts toward the stairs 
               going up, but Jack stops her. There is only about a foot of 
               the stairwell opening visible.

                                     JACK
                         Too deep. We gotta find another way 
                         out.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. BOAT 6 AND TITANIC

               TIGHT ON THE LETTERS TITANIC painted two feet high on the 
               bow of the doomed steamer. Once 50 feet above the waterline, 
               they now quietly slip below the surface. We see them, gold 
               on black, rippling and dimming to a pale green as they go 
               deeper.

               IN BOAT SIX

               Ruth looks back at the Titanic, transfixed by the sight of 
               the dying liner. The bowsprit is now barely above the 
               waterline. Another of Boxhall's rockets EXPLODES overhead. K-
               BOOM! It lights up the whole area, and we see half a dozen 
               boats in the water, spreading out from the ship.

                                     MOLLY
                         Now there's somethin' you don't see 
                         every day.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. SCOTLAND ROAD / E-DECK

               The widest passageway in the ship, it is used by crew and 
               steerage alike, and runs almost the length of the ship. Right 
               now steerage passengers move along it like refugees, heading 
               aft.

               CRASH! A wooden doorframe splinters and the door bursts open 
               under the force of Jack's shoulder. Jack and Rose stumble 
               through, into the corridor. A STEWARD, who was nearby herding 
               people along, marches over.

                                     STEWARD
                         Here you! You'll have to pay for 
                         that, you know. That's White Star 
                         Line property --

                                     JACK AND ROSE
                              (turning together)
                         Shut up!

               Jack leads her past the dumbfounded steward. They join the 
               steerage stragglers going aft. In places the corridor is 
               almost completely blocked by large families carrying all 
               their luggage.

               An IRISH WOMAN gives Rose a blanket, more for modesty than 
               because she is blue-lipped and shivering.

                                     IRISH WOMAN
                         Here, lass, cover yerself.

               Jack rubs her arms and tries to warm her up as they walk 
               along. The woman's husband offers them a flask of whiskey.

                                     IRISH MAN
                         This'll take the chill off.

               Rose takes a mighty belt and hands it to Jack. He grins and 
               follows suit. Jack tries a number of DOORS and IRON GATES 
               along the way, finding them all locked.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. BOAT DECK

               ON THE BOAT DECK

               The action has moved to the aft group of boats, numbers 9, 
               11, 13 and 15 on the starboard side, and 10, 12, 14 and 16 
               on the port side. The pace of work is more frantic. You see 
               crew and officers running now to work the davits, their 
               previous complacency gone.

               Cal pushes through the crowd, scanning for Rose. Around him 
               is chaos and confusion. A woman is calling for a child who 
               has become separated from the crowd. A man is shouting over 
               people's heads. A woman takes hold of Second Officer 
               Lightoller's arm as he is about to launch Boat 10.

                                     WOMAN
                         Will you hold the boat a moment? I 
                         have to run back to my room for 
                         something --

               Lightoller grabs her and shoves her bodily into the boat. 
               Thomas Andrews rushes up to him just then.

                                     ANDREWS
                         Why are the boats being launched 
                         half full?!

               Lightoller steps past him, helping a seaman clear a snarled 
               fall.

                                     LIGHTOLLER
                         Not now, Mr. Andrews.

                                     ANDREWS
                              (pointing down at the 
                              water)
                         There, look... twenty or so in a 
                         boat built for sixty five. And I saw 
                         one boat with only twelve. Twelve!

                                     LIGHTOLLER
                         Well... we were not sure of the weight --

                                     ANDREWS
                         Rubbish! They were tested in Belfast 
                         with the weight of 70 men. Now fill 
                         these boats, Mr. Lightoller. For 
                         God's sake, man!

               The shot HANDS OFF to Cal, who sees Lovejoy hurrying toward 
               him through the aisle connecting the port and starboard sides 
               of the boat deck.

                                     LOVEJOY
                         She's not on the starboard side 
                         either.

                                     CAL
                         We're running out of time. And this 
                         strutting martinet...
                              (indicating Lightoller)
                         ...isn't letting any men in at all.

                                     LOVEJOY
                         The one on the other side is letting 
                         men in.

                                     CAL
                         Then that's our play. But we're still 
                         going to need some insurance.
                              (he starts off forward)
                         Come on.

               Cal charges off, heading forward, followed by Lovejoy. The 
               SHOT HANDS OFF to a finely dressed elderly couple, IDA and 
               ISADOR STRAUSS.

                                     ISADOR
                         Please, Ida, get into the boat.

                                     IDA
                         No. We've been together for forty 
                         years, and where you go, I go. Don't 
                         argue with me, Isador, you know it 
                         does no good.

               He looks at her with sadness and great love. They embrace 
               gently.

                                     LIGHTOLLER
                         Lower away!!

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. BRIDGE / FORWARD WELL DECK / FOC'SLE

               AT THE BOW

               The place where Jack and Rose first kissed... the bow railing 
               goes under water water. Water swirls around the captsans and 
               windlasses on the foc'sle deck.

               Smith strides to the bridge rail and looks down at the well 
               deck. Water is shipped over the sides and the well deck is 
               awash. Two men run across the deck, their feet sending up 
               spray. Behind Smith, Boxhall fires another rocket. WHOOSH!

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. E-DECK CORRIDORS AND STAIRWELL

               Fabrizio, standing with Helga Dahl and her family, hears 
               Jack's voice.

                                     JACK
                         Fabrizio! Fabri!

               Fabrizio turns and sees Jack and Rose pushing through the 
               crowd. He and Jack hug like brothers.

                                     FABRIZIO
                         The boats are all going.

                                     JACK
                         We gotta get up there or we're gonna 
                         be gargling saltwater. Where's Tommy?

               Fabrizio points over the heads of the solidly packed crowd 
               to the stairwell.

               Tommy has his hands on the bars of the steel gate which blocks 
               the head of the stairwell. The crew open the gate a foot or 
               so and a few women are squeezing through.

                                     STEWARD #2
                         Women only. No men. No men!!

               But some terrified men, not understanding English, try to 
               rush through the gap, forcing the gate open. The crewmen and 
               stewards push them back, shoving and punching them.

                                     STEWARD #2
                         Get back! Get back you lot!
                              (to the crewmen)
                         Lock it!!

               They struggle to get the gate closed again, while Steward #2 
               brandishes a small revolver. Another holds a fire axe. They 
               lock the gate, and a cry goes up among the crowd, who surge 
               forward, pounding against the steel and shouting in several 
               languages.

                                     TOMMY
                         For the love of God, man, there are 
                         children down here! Let us up, so we 
                         can have a chance!

               But the crewmen are scared now. They have let the situation 
               get out of hand, and now they have a mob. Tommy gives up and 
               pushes his way back through the crowd, going down the stairs. 
               He rejoins Jack, Rose and Fabrizio.

                                     TOMMY
                         It's hopeless that way.

                                     JACK
                         Well, whatever we're goin' to do, we 
                         better do it fast.

               Fabrizio turns to Helga, praying he can make himself 
               understood.

                                     FABRIZIO
                              (with a lot of hand 
                              gestures)
                         Everyone... all of you... come with 
                         me now. We go to the boats. We go to 
                         the boats. Capito? Come now!

               They can't understand what he's saying. They can see his 
               urgency, but OLUF DAHL, the patriarch of the family, shakes 
               his head. He will not panic, and will not let his family go 
               with this boy. Fabrizio turns to Helga.

                                     FABRIZIO
                         Helga... per favore... please... 
                         come with me, I am lucky. Is my 
                         destiny to go to America.

               She kisses him, then steps back to be with her family. Jack 
               lays a hand on his shoulder, his eyes saying "Let's go".

                                     FABRIZIO
                         I will never forget you.

               He turns to Jack, who leads the way out of the crowd. Looking 
               back Fabrizio sees her face disappear into the crowd.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. CAL AND ROSE'S SUITE

               CLUNK! Cal opens his safe and reaches inside. As Lovejoy 
               watches, he pulls out two stacks of bills, still banded by 
               bank wrappers. Then he takes out "Heart of the Ocean", putting 
               it in the pocket of his overcoat, and locks the safe.

                                     CAL
                              (holding up stacks of 
                              bills)
                         I make my own luck.

                                     LOVEJOY
                              (putting the .45 in 
                              his waistband)
                         So do I.

               Cal grins, putting the money in his pocket as they go out.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. STEERAGE, AFT

               Jack, Rose, Fabrizio and Tommy are lost, searching for a way 
               out. They push past confused passengers... past a mother 
               changing her baby's diaper on top of an upturned steamer 
               trunk... past a woman arguing heatedly with a man in Serbo-
               Croatian, a wailing child next to them... past a man kneeling 
               to console a woman who is just sitting on the floor, 
               sobbing... and past another man with an English/Arabic 
               dictionary, trying to figure out what the signs mean, while 
               his wife and children wait patiently.

               Jack et al come upon a narrow stairwell and they go up two 
               decks before they are stopped by a small group pressed up 
               against a steel gate. The steerage men are yelling at a scared 
               STEWARD.

                                     STEWARD
                         Go to the main stairwell, with 
                         everyone else. It'll all get sorted 
                         out there.

               Jack takes one look at this scene and finally just loses it.

                                     JACK
                         God damn it to Hell son of a bitch!!

               He grabs one end of a bench bolted to the floor on the 
               landing. He starts pulling on it, and Tommy and Fabrizio 
               pitch in until the bolts shear and it breaks free. Rose 
               figures out what they are doing and clears a path up the 
               stairs between the waiting people.

                                     ROSE
                         Move aside! Quickly, move aside!

               Jack and Tommy run up the steps with the bench and RAM IT 
               INTO THE GATE with all their strength. It rips loose from 
               its track and falls outward, narrowly missing the steward. 
               Led by Jack, the crowd surges though. Rose steps up to the 
               cowering steward and says in her most imperious tone:

                                     ROSE
                         If you have any intention of keeping 
                         your pathetic job with the White 
                         Star Line, I suggest you escort these 
                         good people to the boat deck... now.

               Class wins out. He nods dumbly motions form them to follow.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. BOAT 6 / TITANIC - NIGHT

               Ruth rows with Molly Brown, two other women and the 
               incompetent sailors. She rests on her oars, exhausted, and 
               looks back at the ship.

               It slants down into the water, still ablaze with light. 
               Nothing is above water forward of the bridge except for the 
               foremast. Another rocket goes off, lighting up the entire 
               area... there are a dozen boats moving outward from the ship.

               AT THE BOAT DECK RAIL

               Captain Smith is shouting to Boat 6 through a large metal 
               megaphone.

                                     SMITH
                         Come back! Come back to the ship!

               CHIEF OFFICER WILDE joins him, blowing his silver whistle.

               FROM BOAT 6

               The whistle comes shrilly across the water. Quartermaster 
               Hitchins grips the rudder in fear.

                                     HITCHINS
                         The suction will pull us right down 
                         if we don't keep going.

                                     MOLLY
                         We got room for lots more. I say we 
                         go back.

                                     HITCHINS
                         No! It's our lives now, not theirs. 
                         And I'm in charge of this boat! Now 
                         row!!

               CAPTAIN SMITH

               At the rail of the boat deck, lowers his megaphone slowly

                                     SMITH
                         The fools.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. A-DECK FOYER

               As Cal and Lovejoy cross the foyer encounter Benjamin 
               Guggenheim and his valet, both dressed in white tie, tail-
               coats and top hats.

                                     CAL
                         Ben, what's the occasion?

                                     GUGGENHEIM
                         We have dressed in our best and are 
                         prepared to go down like gentlemen.

                                     CAL
                         That's admirable, Ben.
                              (walking on)
                         I'll sure and tell your wife... when 
                         I get to New York.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. FIRST CLASS SMOKING ROOM

               There are still two cardgames in progress. The room is quiet 
               and civilized. A silver serving cart, holding a large humidor, 
               begins to roll slowly across the room. One of the cardplayers 
               takes a cigar from it as it rolls by.

                                     CARDPLAYER
                         It seems we've been dealt a bad hand 
                         this time.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. / INT. A-DECK PROMENADE

               Cal and Lovejoy are walking aft with a purposeful stride. 
               They pass CHIEF BAKER JOHGHIN, who is working up a sweat 
               tossing deck chairs over the rail. After they go by, Joughin 
               takes a break and pulls a bottle of scotch from a pocket, 
               opening it. He drains it, and tosses it over the side too, 
               then stands there a little unsteadily.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. BOAT DECK AND A-DECK, AFT

               PANIC IS SETTING IN around the remaining boats aft. The crowd 
               here is now a mix of all three classes. Officers repeatedly 
               warn men back from the boats. The crowd presses in closer.

               Seamen SCAROTT brandishes the tiller of boat 14 to discourage 
               a close press of men who look ready to rush the boat. Several 
               men break ranks and rush forward.

               Lightoller pulls out his Webley revolver and aims it at them.

                                     LIGHTOLLER
                         Get back! Keep order!

               The men back down. Fifth Officer Lowe standing in the boat, 
               yells to the crew.

                                     LOWE
                         Lower away left and right!

               Lightoller turns away from the crowd and, out of their sight, 
               breaks his pistol open. Letting out a long breath, he starts 
               to LOAD IT.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. BOAT DECK, STARBOARD SIDE, AFT

               Cal and Lovejoy arrive in time to see Murdoch lowering his 
               last boat.

                                     CAL
                         We're too late.

                                     LOVEJOY
                         There are still some boats forward. 
                         Stay with this one... Murdoch. He 
                         seems to be quite... practical.

               IN THE WATER BELOW

               There is another panic. Boat 13, already in the water but 
               still attached to its falls, is pushed aft by the discharge 
               water being pumped out of the ship. It winds up directly 
               under boat 15, which is coming down right on top of it.

               The passengers shout in panic to the crew above to stop 
               lowering. They are ignored. Some men put their hands up, 
               trying futilely to keep the 5 tons of boat 15 from crushing 
               them.

               Fred Barrett, the stoker, gets out his knife and leaps to 
               the after falls, climbing rudely over people. He cuts the 
               aft falls while another crewman cuts the forward lines. 13 
               drifts out from beneath 15 just seconds before it touches 
               the water with a slap.

               Cal, looking down from the rail hears GUNSHOTS --

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. BOAT DECK / A-DECK, PORT, AFT

               Fifth Officer Lowe, in Boat 14 is firing his gun as a warning 
               to a bunch of men threatening to jump into the boat as it 
               passes the open promenade on A-Deck.

                                     LOWE
                         Stay back you lot!

               BLAM! BLAM!

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. BOAT DECK, STARBOARD, AFT

               The shots echo away.

                                     CAL
                         It's starting to fall apart. We don't 
                         have much time.

               Cal sees three dogs run by, including the black French 
               bulldog. Someone has released the pets from the kennels.

               Cal sees Murdoch turn from the davits of boat 15 and start 
               walking toward the bow. He catches up and falls in beside 
               him.

                                     CAL
                         Mr. Murdoch, I'm a businessman, as 
                         you know, and I have a business 
                         proposition for you.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. BOAT DECK, PORT

               Jack, Rose et al burst out onto the boat deck from the crew 
               stairs just aft of the third funnel. They look at the empty 
               davits.

                                     ROSE
                         The boats are gone!

               She sees Colonel Gracie chugging forward along the deck, 
               escorting two first class ladies.

                                     ROSE
                         Colonel! Are there any boats left?

                                     GRACIE
                              (staring at her 
                              bedraggled state)
                         Yes, miss... there are still a couple 
                         of boats all the way forward. This 
                         way, I'll lead you!

               Jack grabs her hand and they sprint past Gracie, with Tommy 
               and Fabrizio close behind.

               ANGLE ON THE BAND

               Incredibly they are still playing. Jack, Rose and the others 
               run by.

                                     TOMMY
                         Music to drown by. Now I know I'm in 
                         First Class.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. BOAT DECK, STARBOARD, FORWARD

               Water pours like a spillway over the forward railing on B-
               Deck. CAMERA SWEEPS UP past A-Deck to the Boat Deck where 
               Murdoch and his team are loading Collapsible Car the forward-
               most davits.

               NOTE: There are four so-called collapsibles, or Engelhardts 
               boats, including two which are stored on the roof of the 
               officer's quarters.

               The crowd is sparse, with most people still aft. Cal slips 
               his hand out of the pocket of his overcoat and into the waist 
               pocket of Murdoch's greatcoat, leaving the stacks of bills 
               there.

                                     CAL
                         So we have an understanding then?

                                     MURDOCH
                              (nodding curtly)
                         As you've said.

               Cal, satisfied, steps back. He finds himself waiting next to 
               J. Bruce Ismay. Ismay does not meet his eyes, nor anyone's. 
               Lovejoy comes up to Cal at that moment.

                                     LOVEJOY
                         I've found her. She's just over on 
                         the port side. With him.

                                     MURDOCH
                         Women and children? Any more women 
                         and children?
                              (glancing at Cal)
                         Any one else, then?

               Cal looks longingly at his boat... his moment has arrived.

                                     CAL
                         God damn it to hell! Come on.

               He and Lovejoy head for the port side, taking a short-cut 
               through the bridge.

               Bruce Ismay, seeing his opportunity, steps quickly into 
               Collapsible C. He stares straight ahead, not meeting Murdoch's 
               eyes.

                                     MURDOCH
                              (staring at Ismay)
                         Take them down.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. BOAT DECK / PORT SIDE - NIGHT

               ON THE PORT SIDE

               Lightoller is getting people into Boat 2. He keeps his pistol 
               in his hand at this point. Twenty feet below them the sea is 
               pouring into the doors and windows of B-Deck staterooms. 
               They can hear the roar of water cascading into the ship.

                                     LIGHTOLLER
                         Women and children, please. Women 
                         and children only. Step back, sir.

               Even with Jack's arms wrapped around her, Rose is shivering 
               in the cold. Near her a WOMAN with TWO YOUNG DAUGHTERS looks 
               into the eyes of a HUSBAND she knows she may not see again

                                     HUSBAND
                         Goodbye for a little while... only 
                         for a little while.
                              (to his two little 
                              girls)
                         Go with mummy.

               The woman stumbles to the boat with the children, hiding her 
               tears from them. Beneath the false good cheer, the man is 
               choked with emotion.

                                     HUSBAND
                         Hold mummy's hand and be a good girl. 
                         That's right.

               Some of the women are stoic, others are overwhelmed by emotion 
               and have to be helped into the boats. A MAN scribbles a note 
               and hands it to a woman who is about to board.

                                     MAN
                         Please get this to my wife in 
                         DeMoines, Iowa.

               Jack looks at Tommy and Fabrizio.

                                     JACK
                         You better check out the other side.

               They nod and run off, searching for a way around the 
               deckhouse.

                                     ROSE
                         I'm not going without you.

                                     JACK
                         Get in the boat, Rose.

               Cal walks up just then.

                                     CAL
                         Yes. Get in the boat, Rose.

               She is shocked to see him. She steps instinctively to Jack. 
               Cal looks at her, standing there shivering in her wet slip 
               and stockings, a shocking display in 1912.

                                     CAL
                         My God, look at you.
                              (taking off his boat)
                         Here, put this on.

               She numbly shrugs into it. He is doing it for modesty, not 
               the cold.

                                     LIGHTOLLER
                         Quickly, ladies. Step into the boat. 
                         Hurry, please!

                                     JACK
                         Go on. I'll get the next one.

                                     ROSE
                         No. Not without you!

               She doesn't even care that Cal is standing right there. He 
               sees the emotion between Jack and Rose and his jaw clenches. 
               But then he leans close to her and says...

                                     CAL
                              (low)
                         There are boats on the other side 
                         that are allowing men in. Jack and I 
                         can get off safely. Both of us.

                                     JACK
                              (he smiles reassuringly)
                         I'll be alright. Hurry up so we can 
                         get going... we got our own boat to 
                         catch.

                                     CAL
                         Get in... hurry up, it's almost full.

               Lightoller grabs her arm and pulls her toward the boat. She 
               reaches out for Jack and her fingers brush his for a moment. 
               Then she finds herself stepping down into the boat. It's all 
               a rush and blur.

                                     LIGHTOLLER
                         Lower away!

               The two men watch at the rail as the boat begins to descend.

                                     CAL
                              (low)
                         You're a good liar.

                                     JACK
                         Almost as good as you.

                                     CAL
                         I always win, Jack. One way or 
                         another.
                              (looks at him, smiling)
                         Pity I didn't keep that drawing. 
                         It's going to be worth a lot more by 
                         morning.

               Jack knows he is screwed. He looks down at Rose, not wanting 
               to waste a second of his last view of her.

               ROSE'S PERCEPTION - IN SLOW MOTION

               The ropes going through the pulleys as the seamen start to 
               lower. All sound going away... Lightoller giving orders, his 
               lips moving... but Rose hears only the blood pounding in her 
               ears... this cannot be happening... a rocket bursts above in 
               slow-motion, outlining Jack in a halo of light... Rose's 
               hair blowing in slow motion as she gazes up at him, descending 
               away from him... she sees his hand trembling, the tears at 
               the corners of his eyes, and cannot believe the unbearable 
               pain she is feeling...

               Rose is still staring up, tears pouring down her face.

               SUDDENLY SHE IS MOVING. She lunges across the women next to 
               her. Reaches the gunwale, climbing it...

               Hurls herself out of the boat to the rail of the A-Deck 
               promenade, catching it, and scrambling over the rail. The 
               Boat 2 continues down. But Rose is back on Titanic.

                                     JACK
                         No Rose! NOOOO!!

               Jack spins from the rail, running for the nearest way down 
               to A-Deck.

               Hockley too has seen her jump. She is willing to die for 
               this man, this gutter scum. He is overwhelmed by a rage so 
               all consuming it eclipses all thought.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. GRAND STAIRCASE

               TRACKING WITH JACK as he bangs through the doors to the foyer 
               and sprints down the stairs. He sees her coming into A-deck 
               foyer, running toward him, Cal's long coat flying out behind 
               her as she runs.

               They meet at the bottom of the stairs, and collide in an 
               embrace.

                                     JACK
                         Rose, Rose, you're so stupid, you're 
                         such an idiot --

               And all the while he's kissing her and holding her as tight 
               as he can.

                                     ROSE
                         You jump, I jump, right?

                                     JACK
                         Right.

               Hockley comes in and runs to the railing. Looking down he 
               sees them locked in their embrace. Lovejoy comes up behind 
               Cal and puts a restraining HAND on him, but Cal whips around, 
               grabbing the pistol from Lovejoy's waistband in one cobra-
               fast move.

               He RUNS along the rail and down the stairs. As he reaches 
               the landing above them he raises the gun. SCREAMING in rage, 
               he FIRES.

               The carved cherub at the foot of the center railing EXPLODES. 
               Jack pulls Rose toward the stairs going down to the next 
               deck. Cal fires again, running down the steps toward them. A 
               bullet blows a divet out of the oak panelling behind Jack's 
               head as he pulls Rose down the next flight of stairs.

               Hockley steps on the skittering head of the cherub statue 
               and goes sprawling. The gun clatters across the marble floor. 
               He gets up, and reeling drunkenly goes over to retrieve it.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. D-DECK RECEPTION ROOM

               The bottom of the grand staircase is flooded several feet 
               deep. Jack and Rose come down the stairs two at a time and 
               run straight into the water, fording across the room to where 
               the floor slopes up, until they reach dry footing at the 
               entrance to the dining saloon.

               STEADICAM WITH HOCKLEY as he reels down the stairs in time 
               to see Jack and Rose splashing through the water toward the 
               dining saloon. He FIRES twice. Big gouts of spray near them, 
               but he's not a great shot.

               The water boils up around his feet and he retreats up the 
               stairs a couple of steps. Around him the woodwork groans and 
               creaks.

                                     CAL
                              (calling to them)
                         Enjoy your time together!!

               Lovejoy arrives next to him. Cal suddenly remembers something 
               and starts to laugh.

                                     LOVEJOY
                         What could possible be funny?

                                     CAL
                         I put the diamond in my coat pocket. 
                         And I put my coat... on her.

               He turns to Lovejoy with a sickly expression, his eyes 
               glittering.

                                     CAL
                         I give it to you... if you can get 
                         it.

               He hands Lovejoy the pistol and goes back up the stairs. 
               Lovejoy thinks about it... then slogs into the water. The 
               icewater is up to his waist as he crosses the pool into the 
               dining saloon.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. DINING SALOON

               Lovejoy moves among the tables and ornate columns, 
               searching... listening... his eyes tracking rapidly. It is a 
               sea of tables, and they could be anywhere. A silver serving 
               trolley rolls downhill, bumping into tables and pillars.

               He glances behind him. The water is following him into the 
               room, advancing in a hundred foot wide tide. The reception 
               room is now a roiling lake, and the grand staircase is 
               submerged past the first landing. Monstrous groans echo 
               through the ship.

               ON JACK AND ROSE

               Crouched behind a table, somewhere in the middle. They see 
               the water advancing toward them, swirling over the floor. 
               They crawl ahead of it to the next row of tables.

                                     JACK
                              (whispering)
                         Stay here.

               He moves off as --

               Lovejoy moves over one row and looks along the tables. 
               Nothing.

               The ship GROANS and CREAKS. He moves another row.

               ANGLE ON A METAL CART

               Five feet tall and full of stacks of china dishes. It starts 
               to roll down the aisle between tables.

               ON ROSE

               As the cart rolls toward her. It hits a table and the stacks 
               of dishes topple out, EXPLODING across the floor and showering 
               her.

               She scrambles out of the way and --

               Lovejoy spins, seeing her. He moves rapidly toward her, 
               keeping the gun aimed --

               That's when Jack tackles him from the side. They slam together 
               into a table, crashing over it, and toppling to the floor. 
               They land in the water which is flowing rapidly between the 
               tables.

               Jack and Lovejoy grapple in the icy water. Jack jams his 
               knee down on Lovejoy's hand, breaking his grip on the pistol, 
               and kicks it away. Lovejoy scrambles up and lunges at him, 
               but Jack GUT PUCHES him right in the solar plexus, doubling 
               him over.

                                     JACK
                         Compliments of the Chippewa Falls 
                         Dawsons.

               He grabs Lovejoy and slams him into an ornate column. Lovejoy 
               drops to the floor with a splash, stunned.

                                     JACK
                         Let's go.

               Jack and Rose run aft... uphill... entering the galley. Behind 
               them the tables have become islands in a lake... and the far 
               end of the room is flooded up to the ceiling.

               Lovejoy gets up and looks around for his gun. He pulls it up 
               out of the water and wades after them.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. GALLEY / STAIRWELL

               They run through the galley and Rose spots the stairs. She 
               starts up and Jack grabs her hand. He leads her DOWN.

               They crouch together on the landing as Lovejoy runs to the 
               stairs. Assuming they have gone up (who wouldn't?) he climbs 
               up them two at a time.

               They wait for the footstep to recede. A long CREAKING GROAN. 
               Then they hear it... a CRYING CHILD. Below them. They go 
               down a few steps to looks along the next deck.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. E-DECK CORRIDORS

               The corridor is awash, about a foot deep. Standing against 
               the wall, about 50 feet away, is a little BOY, about 3. The 
               water swirls around his legs and he is wailing.

                                     ROSE
                         We can't leave him.

               Jack nods and they leave the promise of escape up the 
               stairwell to run to the child. Jack scoops up the kid and 
               they run back to the stairs but --

               A torrent of water comes pouring down the stairs like rapids. 
               In seconds it is too powerful for them to go against.

                                     JACK
                         Come on.

               Charging the other way down the flooding corridor, they blast 
               up spray with each footstep. At the end of the hall are heavy 
               double doors. As Jack approaches them he sees water spraying 
               through the gap between the doors right up to the ceiling. 
               The doors groan and start to crack under the tons of pressure.

                                     JACK
                         Back! Go back!!

               Rose pivots and runs back the way they came, taking a turn 
               into a cross-corridor. A MAN is coming the other way. He 
               sees the boy in Jack's arms and cries out, grabbing him away 
               from Jack. Starts cursing him in Russian. He runs on with 
               the boy --

                                     ROSE
                         No! Not that way! Come back!

               DOUBLE DOORS BLAST OPEN. A wall of water thunders into the 
               corridor. The father and child DISAPPEAR instantly.

               Jack and Rose run as a wave blasts around the corner, foaming 
               from floor to ceiling. It gains on them like a locomotive. 
               They make it to a stairway going up.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. STAIRWELL

               Jack and Rose pound up the steps as white water swirls up 
               behind them. PULL BACK to reveal that a steel gate blocks 
               the top of the stairs. Jack SLAMS against the gate, gripping 
               the bars.

               A terrified steward standing guard on the landing above turns 
               to run at the sight of the water thundering up the stairs.

                                     JACK
                         Wait! Wait! Help us! Unlock the gate.

               The steward runs on. The water wells up around Jack and Rose, 
               pouring through the gate and slamming them against it. In 
               seconds it is up to their waist.

                                     ROSE
                         Help us! Please!

               The steward stops and looks back. He sees Jack and Rose at 
               the gate, their arms reaching through... sees the water 
               POURING through the gate onto the landing.

                                     STEWARD
                         Fucking 'ell!

               He runs back, slogging against the torrent. He pulls a key 
               ring from his belt and struggles to unlock the padlock as 
               the water fountains up around them.

               The lights short out and the landing is plunged into darkness.

               The water rises over the lock and he's doing it by feel.

                                     JACK
                         Come on! Come on!

               Jack and Rose are right up against the ceiling...

               Suddenly the gate gives and SWINGS OPEN. They are pushing 
               through by the force of the water. They make it to stairs on 
               the other side of the landing and follow the steward up to 
               the next deck.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. BOAT DECK, STARBOARD SIDE

               Cal comes reeling out of the first class entrance, looking 
               wild-eyed. The lurches down the deck toward the bridge. Waltz 
               music wafts over the ship. Somewhere the band is still 
               playing.

               CAL'S POV

               A little girl, maybe two years old, is crying along in the 
               alcove. She looks up at Cal beseechingly. Cal moves on without 
               a glance back... reaching a large crowd clustered around 
               COLLAPSIBLE A just aft of the bridge. He sees Murdoch and a 
               number of crewmen struggling to drag the boat to the davits, 
               with no luck.

               Cal pushes forward, trying to signal Murdoch, but the officer 
               ignores him. Nearby Tommy and Fabrizio are being pushed 
               forward by the crowd behind. PURSER MCELROY pushes them back, 
               getting a couple of seamen to help him. He brandishes his 
               gun, waving it in the air, yelling for the crowd to stay 
               back.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. BOAT DECK, PORT SIDE / ROOF OF OFFICERS' QUARTERS

               Lightoller, with a group of crew and passengers, is trying 
               to get Collapsible B down from the roof. They slide it down 
               a pair of oars leaned against the deck house.

                                     LIGHTOLLER
                         Hold it! Hold it!

               The weight of the boat snaps the oars and it crashes to the 
               deck, upside down. The two Swedish cousins, OLAUS and BJORN 
               GUNERSEN, jump back as the boat nearly hits them.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. STAIRWELL

               Jack and Rose run up seemingly endless stairs as the ship 
               groans and torgues around them.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. BOAT DECK, STARBOARD SIDE

               Murdoch, at Collapsible A, is no longer in control. The crowd 
               is threatening to rush the boat. They push and jostle, yelling 
               and shouting at the officers. The pressure from behind pushes 
               them forward, and one guy falls off the edge of the deck 
               into the water less than ten feet below.

                                     TOMMY
                         Give us a chance to live, you limey 
                         bastards!

               Murdoch fires his Webley twice in the air, then point it at 
               the crowd.

                                     MURDOCH
                         I'll shoot any man who tries to get 
                         past me.

               Cal steps up to him.

                                     CAL
                         We had a deal, damn you.

               Murdoch pushes him back, pointing the pistol at Cal.

                                     MURDOCH
                         Get back!

               A man next to Tommy rushes forward, and Tommy is shoved from 
               behind. Murdoch SHOOTS the first man, and seeing Tommy coming 
               forward, puts a bullet into his chest.

               Tommy collapses, and Fabrizio grabs him, holding him in his 
               arms as his life flows out over the deck.

               Murdoch turns to his men and salutes smartly. Then he puts 
               the pistol to his temple and... BLAM! He drops like a puppet 
               with the strings cut and topples over the edge of the boat 
               deck into the water only a few feet below.

               Cal stares in horror at Murdoch's body bobbing in the black 
               water. The MONEY FLOATS out of the pocket of his greatcoat, 
               the bills spreading across the surface.

               The crew rush to get the last few women aboard the boat.

                                     PURSER MCELROY
                              (calling above the 
                              confusion)
                         Any more women or children?!

               THE CHILD

               Crying in the alcove. Cal scoops her up and runs forward, 
               cradling her in his arms.

                                     CAL
                              (forcing his way 
                              through the crowd)
                         Here's a child! I've got a child!
                              (to McElroy)
                         Please... I'm all she has in the 
                         world.

               McElroy nods curtly and pushes him into the boat. He spins 
               with his gun, brandishing it in the air to keep the other 
               men back. Cal gets into the boat, holding the little girl. 
               He takes a seat with the women.

                                     CAL
                         There, there.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. FIRST CLASS SMOKE ROOM

               Thomas Andrews stands in front of the fireplace, staring at 
               the large painting above the mantle. The fire is still going 
               in the fireplace.

               The room is empty except for Andrews. An ashtray falls off 
               the table. Behind him Jack and Rose run into the room, out 
               of breath and soaked. They run through, toward the aft 
               revolving door... then Rose recognizes him. She sees that 
               his lifebelt is off, lying on a table.

                                     ROSE
                         Won't you even make a try for it, 
                         Mr. Andrews?

                                     ANDREWS
                              (a tear rolls down 
                              his cheek)
                         I'm sorry that I didn't build you a 
                         stronger ship, young Rose.

                                     JACK
                              (to her)
                         It's going fast... we've got to keep 
                         moving.

               Andrews picks up his lifebelt and hands it to her.

                                     ANDREWS
                         Good luck to you, Rose.

                                     ROSE
                              (hugging him)
                         And to you, Mr. Andrews.

               Jack pulls her away and they run through the revolving door.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. BOAT DECK AND VARIOUS LOCATIONS

               The band finishes the waltz. Wallace Hartley looks at the 
               orchestra members.

                                     HARTLEY
                         Right, that's it then.

               They leave him, walking forward along the deck. Hartley puts 
               his violin to his chin and bows the first notes of "Nearer 
               My God to Thee". One by one the band members turn, hearing 
               the lonely melody.

               Without a word they walk back and take their places. They 
               join in with Hartley, filling out the sound so that it reaches 
               all over the ship on this still night. The vocalist begins: 
               "If in my dreams I be, nearer my God to thee..."

               THE HYMN PLAYS OVER THE FOLLOWING SEQUENCE:

               A seaman pulls off his lifebelt and catches up to Captain 
               Smith as he walks to the bridge. He proffers it, but Smith 
               seems to stare through him. Without a word he turns and goes 
               onto the bridge. He enters the enclosed WHEELHOUSE and closes 
               the door. He is alone, surrounded by the gleaming brass 
               instruments. He seems to inwardly collapse.

               IN THE FIRST CLASS SMOKING ROOM

               Andrews stands like a statue. He pulls out his pocketwatch 
               and checks the time. Then he opens the face of the mantle 
               clock and adjusts it to the correct time: 2:12 a.m. Everything 
               must be correct.

               IN CAL'S PARLOUR SUITE

               Water swirls in from the private promenade deck. Rose's 
               paintings are submerged. The Picasso transforms under the 
               water's surface. Degas' colors run. Monet's water lilies 
               come to life.

               DOWN ANGLE

               On the two figures lying side by side, fully clothed, on a 
               bed in a FIRST CLASS CABIN. Elderly Ida and Isador Strauss 
               stare at the ceiling, holding hands like young lovers. Water 
               pours into the room through a doorway. It swirls around the 
               bed, two feet deep rising fast.

               IN A STEERAGE CABIN

               Somewhere in the bowels of the ship, the young IRISH MOTHER, 
               seen earlier stoically waiting at the stairs, is tucking her 
               two young children into bed. She pulls up the covers, making 
               sure they are all warm and cozy. She lies down with them on 
               the bed, speaking soothingly and holding them.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. BOAT DECK / BRIDGE

               IN A WIDE SHOT we see a wave travel up the boat deck as the 
               bridge house sinks into the water.

               ON THE PORT SIDE

               Collapsible B is picked up by water. Working frantically, 
               the men try to detach it from the falls so the ship won't 
               drag it under. Colonel Gracie hands Lightoller a pocket knife 
               and he saws furiously at the ropes as the water swirls around 
               his legs. The boat, still upside down, is swept off the ship. 
               Men start diving in, swimming to stay with it.

               IN COLLAPSIBLE A

               Cal sits next to the wailing child, whom he has completely 
               forgotten. He watches the water rising around the men as 
               they work, scrambling to get the ropes cut so the ship won't 
               drag the collapsible under.

               Fabrizio removes the lifebelt from Tommy's body and struggles 
               to put it on as the water rises around him.

               CAPTAIN SMITH

               Standing near the wheel, watches the black water climbing 
               the windows of the enclosed wheelhouse. He has the stricken 
               expression of a damned soul on Judgment Day. The windows 
               burst suddenly and a wall of water edged with shards of glass 
               slams into Smith. He disappears in a vortex of foam.

               Collapsible A is hit by a wave as the bow plunges suddenly. 
               It partially swamps the boat, washing it along the deck. 
               Over a hundred passengers are plunged into the freezing water 
               and the area around the boat becomes a frenzy of splashing, 
               screaming people.

               As men are trying to climb into the collapsible, Cal grabs 
               an oar and pushes them back into the water.

                                     CAL
                         Get back! You'll swamp us!

               Fabrizio, swimming for his life, gets swirled under a davit. 
               The ropes and pulleys tangle around him as the davit goes 
               under the water, and he is dragged down. Underwater he 
               struggles to free himself, and then kicks back to the surface. 
               He surfaces, gasping for air in the freezing water.

               WALLACE HARTLEY

               Sees the water rolling rapidly up the deck toward them. He 
               holds the last note of the hymn in a sustain, and then lowers 
               his violin.

                                     HARTLEY
                         Gentlemen, it has been a privilege 
                         playing with you tonight.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. A-DECK AFT, PORT SIDE

               Jack and Rose run out of the PALM COURT into a dense crowd. 
               Jack pushes his way to the rail and looks at the state of 
               the ship. The bridge is under water and there is chaos on 
               deck. Jack helps her put her lifebelt on. People stream around 
               them, shouting and pushing.

                                     JACK
                         Okay... we keep moving aft. We have 
                         to stay on the ship as long as 
                         possible.

               They push their way aft through the panicking crowd.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. FORWARD FUNNEL

               Collapsible A is whirled like a leaf in the currents around 
               the sinking ship. It slams against the side of the forward 
               funnel.

                                     CAL
                              (to the crew in the 
                              boat)
                         Row! Row you bastards!!

               NEARBY

               Fabrizio is drawn up against the grating of a STOKEHOLD VENT 
               as water pours through it. The force of tons of water roaring 
               down the ship traps him against it, and he is dragged down 
               under the surface as the ship sinks. He struggles to free 
               himself but cannot.

               Suddenly there is a concussion deep in the bowels of the 
               ship as a furnace explodes and a blast of hot air belches 
               out of the ventilator, ejecting Fabrizio. He surfaces in a 
               roar of foam and keeps swimming.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. A-DECK / B-DECK / WELL DECK, AFT

               Jack and Rose clamber over the A-Deck aft rail. Then, using 
               all his strength, he lowers her toward the deck below, holding 
               on with one hand. She dangles, then falls. Jack jumps down 
               behind her.

               They join a crush of people literally clawing and scrambling 
               over each other to get down the narrow stairs to the well 
               deck... the only way aft.

               Seeing that the stairs are impossible, Jack climbs over the 
               B-Deck railing and helps Rose over. He lowers her again, and 
               she falls in a heap. Baker Joughin, now three sheets to the 
               wind, happens to be next to her. He hauls Rose to her feet. 
               Jack drops down and the three of them push through the crowd 
               across the well deck. Near them, at the rail, people are 
               jumping into the water.

               The ship GROANS and SHUDDERS. The man ahead of Jack is walking 
               like a zombie.

                                     MAN
                         Yeah, though I walk through the valley 
                         of the shadow of death --

                                     JACK
                         You wanna walk a little faster through 
                         that valley, fella?

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. FORWARD FUNNEL

               The stay cables along the top of the funnel snap, and they 
               lash like steel whips down into the water. Cal watches as 
               the funnel topples from its mounts. Falling like a temple 
               pillar twenty eight feet across it whomps into the water 
               with a tremendous splash. People swimming underneath it 
               disappear in an instant.

               Fabrizio, a few feet away, is hurled back by a huge wave. He 
               comes up, gasping... still swimming. The water pouring into 
               the open end of the funnel draws in several swimmers. The 
               funnel sinks, disappearing, but --

               Hundreds of tons of water pour down through the 30 foot hole 
               where the funnel stood, thundering down into the belly of 
               the ship. A whirlpool forms, a hole in the ocean, like at 
               enormous toilet-flush. T. W. McCauley, the gym instructor 
               swims in a frenzy as the vortex draws him in. He is sucked 
               down like a spider going down a drain.

               Fabrizio, nearby, swims like Hell as more people are sucked 
               down behind him. He manages to get clear. He's going to live 
               no matter what it takes.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. BOAT DECK FOYER / GRAND STAIRCASE

               Water roars through the doors and windows, cascading down 
               the stairs like a rapids. John Jacob Astor is swept down the 
               marble steps to A-Deck, which is already flooded... a roiling 
               vortex. He grabs the headless cherub at the bottom of the 
               staircase and wraps his arms around it.

               Astor looks up in time to see the 30 foot glass dome overhead 
               EXPLODE INWARD with the wave of water washing over it. A 
               Niagara of sea water thunders down into the room, blasting 
               through the first class opulence. It is the Armageddon of 
               elegance.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. BELOW DECKS

               The flooding is horrific. Walls and doors are splintered 
               like kindling. Water roars down corridors with pile-driver 
               force.

               The CARTMELL FAMILY is at the top of a stairwell, jammed 
               against a locked gate like Jack and Rose were. Water boils 
               up the stairwell behind them. Bert Cartmell shakes the gate 
               futilely, shouting for help. Little Cora wails as the water 
               boils up around them all.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. STERN

               Rose and Jack struggle to climb the well deck stairs as the 
               ship tilts. Drunk Baker Joughin puts a hand squarely on Rose's 
               butt and shoves her up onto the deck.

                                     JOUGHIN
                         Sorry, miss!

               Hundreds of people are already on the poop deck, and more 
               are pouring up every second. Jack and Rose cling together as 
               they struggle across the tilting deck.

               As the bow goes down, the STERN RISES. IN BOAT 2, which is 
               just off the stern, passengers gape as the giant bronze 
               propellers rise out of the water like gods of the deep, 
               FILLING FRAME behind them.

               People are JUMPING from the well deck, the poop deck, the 
               gangway doors. Some hit debris in the water and are hurt or 
               killed.

               EXT. STERN

               ON THE POOP DECK

               Jack and Rose struggle aft as the angle increases. Hundreds 
               of passengers, clinging to every fixed object on deck, huddle 
               on their knees around FATHER BYLES, who has his voice raised 
               in prayer. They are praying, sobbing, or just staring at 
               nothing, their minds blank with dread.

               Pulling himself from handhold to handhold, Jack tugs Rose 
               aft along the deck.

                                     JACK
                         Come on, Rose. We can't expect God 
                         to do all the work for us.

               They struggle on, pushing through the praying people. A MAN 
               loses his footing ahead and slides toward them. Jack helps 
               him.

               THE PROPELLERS

               Are twenty feet above the water and rising faster.

               JACK AND ROSE

               Make it to the stern rail, right at the base of the flagpole. 
               They grip the rail, jammed in between other people. It is 
               the spot where Jack pulled her back onto the ship, just two 
               night... and a lifetime... ago.

               Above the wailing and sobbing, Father Byles' voice carries, 
               cracking with emotion.

                                     FATHER BYLES
                         ...and I saw new heavens and a new 
                         earth. The former heavens and the 
                         former earth had passed away and the 
                         sea was no longer.

               The lights flicker, threatening to go out. Rose grips Jack 
               as the stern rises into a night sky ablaze with stars.

                                     FATHER BYLES
                         I also saw a new Jerusalem, the holy 
                         city coming down out of heaven from 
                         God, beautiful as a bride prepared 
                         to meet her husband. I heard a loud 
                         voice from the throne ring out this 
                         is God's dwelling among men. He shall 
                         dwell with them and they shall be 
                         his people and He shall be their God 
                         who is always with them.

               Rose stares about her at the faces of the doomed. Near them 
               are the DAHL FAMILY, clinging together stoically. Helga looks 
               at her briefly, and her eyes are infinitely sad.

               Rose sees a young mother next to her, clutching her five 
               year old son, who is crying in terror.

                                     MOTHER
                         Shhh. Don't cry. It'll be over soon, 
                         darling. It'll all be over soon.

                                     FATHER BYLES
                         He shall wipe every tear from their 
                         eyes. And there shall be no more 
                         death or mourning, crying out or 
                         pain, for the former world has passed 
                         away.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. SHIP - VARIOUS

               As the ship tilts further everything not bolted down inside 
               shifts.

               CUPBOARDS

               Burst open in the pantry showering the floor with tons of 
               china. A PIANO slides across the floor, crashing into a wall. 
               FURNITURE tumbles across the Smoking Room floor.

               ON THE A-DECK PROMENADE

               Passengers lose their grip and slide down the wooden deck 
               like a bobsled run, hundreds of feet before they hit the 
               water. TRUDY BOLT, Rose's maid, slips as she struggles along 
               the railing and slides away screaming.

               AT THE STERN

               The propellers are 100 feet out of the water and rising. 
               Panicking people leap from the poop deck rail, fall screaming 
               and hit the water like mortar rounds. A man falls from the 
               poop deck, hitting the bronze hub of the starboard propeller 
               with a sickening smack.

               SWIMMERS LOOK UP

               And see the stern towering over them like a monolith, the 
               propellers rising against the stars. 110 feet. 120.

               AT THE STERN RAIL

               A man jumps. IN HIS POV we fall seemingly forever, right 
               past one of the giant screws. The water rushes up --

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. TITANIC / BOAT

               TRACKING SLOWLY IN on Ruth as the sounds of the dying ship 
               and the screaming people come across the water.

               REVERSE / HER POV

               IN A WIDE SHOT we see the spectacle of the Titanic, her lights 
               blazing, reflecting in the still water. Its stern is high in 
               the air, angles up over forty five degrees. The propellers 
               are 150 feet out of the water. Over a thousand passengers 
               cling to the decks, looking from a distance like a swarm of 
               bees.

               The image is shocking, unbelievable, unthinkable. Ruth stares 
               at the spectacle, unable to frame it or put it into any 
               proportion.

                                     MOLLY BROWN
                         God Almighty.

               The great liner's lights flicker.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. ENGINE ROOM

               In darkness Chief Engineer Bell hangs onto a pipe at the 
               master breaker panel. Around him men climb through tilted 
               cyclopean machines with electric hand-torches. It is a black 
               hell of breaking pipes, spraying water, and groaning machinery 
               threatening to tear right out of its bedplates.

               Water sprays down, hitting the breaker panel, but Bell will 
               not leave his post. CLUNK. The breakers kick. He slams them 
               in again and -- WHOOM! a blast of light! Something melts and 
               arcing fills the engine room with nightmarish light --

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. TITANIC

               WIDE SHOT

               The lights go out all over the ship. Titanic becomes a vast 
               black silhouette against the stars.

               IN COLLAPSIBLE C

               Bruce Ismay has his back to the ship, unable to watch the 
               great steamer die. He is catatonic with remorse, his mind 
               overloaded. He can avert his eyes, but he can't block out 
               the sounds of dying people and machinery.

               A loud CRACKING REPORT comes across the water.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. BOAT DECK

               Near the third funnel a man clutches the ship's rail. He 
               stares down as the DECK SPLITS right between his feet. A 
               yawning chasm opens with a THUNDER of breaking steel Lovejoy 
               is clutching the railing on the roof of the Officers' Mess. 
               He watches in horror as the ship's structure RIPS APART right 
               in front of him. He gapes down into a widening maw, seeing 
               straight down into the bowels of the ship, amid a BOOMING 
               CONCUSSION like the sound of artillery. People falling into 
               the widening crevasse look like dolls.

               The stay cables on the funnel part and snap across the decks 
               like whips, ripping off davits and ventilators. A man is hit 
               by a whipping cable and snatched OUT OF FRAME. Another cable 
               smashes the rail next to Lovejoy and it rips free. He falls 
               backward into the pit of jagged metal.

               Fires, explosions and sparks light the yawning chasm as the 
               hull splits down through nine decks to the keel. The sea 
               pours into the gaping wound --

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. ENGINE ROOM

               It is a thundering black hell. Men scream as monstrous 
               machinery comes apart around them, steel frames twisting 
               like taffy. Their torches illuminate the roaring, foaming 
               demon of water as it races at the through the machines. Trying 
               to climb they are overtaken in seconds.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. TITANIC - NIGHT

               The STERN HALF of the ship, almost four hundred feet long, 
               falls back toward the water. On the poop deck everyone screams 
               as they feel themselves plummeting. The sound goes up like 
               the roar of fans at a baseball stadium when a run is scored.

               Swimming in the water directly under the stern a few 
               unfortunates shriek as they see the keel coming down on them 
               like God's bootheel. The massive stern section falls back 
               almost level, thundering down into the sea and pushing out a 
               mighty wave of displaced water.

               Jack and Rose struggle to hold onto the stern rail. They 
               feel the ship seemingly RIGHT ITSELF. Some of those praying 
               think it is salvation.

                                     SEVERAL PEOPLE
                         We're saved!

               Jack looks at Rose and shakes his head, grimly.

               Now the horrible mechanics play out. Pulled down by the 
               awesome weight of the flooded bow, the buoyant stern tilts 
               up rapidly. They feel the RUSH OF ASCENT as the fantail angles 
               up again. Everyone is clinging to benches, railings, 
               ventilators... anything to keep from sliding as the stern 
               lifts.

               The stern goes up and up, past 45 degrees, then past sixty.

               People start to fall, sliding and tumbling. They skid down 
               the deck, screaming and flailing to grab onto something. 
               They wrench other people loose and pull them down as well. 
               There is a pile-up of bodies at the forward rail. The DAHL 
               FAMILY falls one by one.

                                     JACK
                         We have to move!

               He climbs over the stern rail and reaches back for Rose. She 
               is terrified to move. He grabs her hand.

                                     JACK
                         Come on! I've got you!

               Jack pulls her over the rail. It is the same place he pulled 
               her over the rail two nights earlier, going the other 
               direction. She gets over just as the railing is going 
               HORIZONTAL, and the deck VERITCAL. Jack grips her fiercely.

               The stern is now straight up in the air... a rumbling black 
               monolith standing against the stars. It hangs there like 
               that for a long grace note, its buoyancy stable.

               Rose lies on the railing, looking down fifteen stories to 
               the boiling sea at the base of the stern section. People 
               near them, who didn't climb over, hang from the railing, 
               their legs dangling over the long drop. They fall one by 
               one, plummeting down the vertical face of the poop deck. 
               Some of them bounce horribly off deck benches and ventilators.

               Jack and Rose lie side by side on what was the vertical face 
               of the hull, gripping the railing, which is now horizontal. 
               Just beneath their feet are the gold letters "TITANIC" 
               emblazoned across the stern.

               Rose stares down terrified at the black ocean waiting below 
               to claim them. Jack looks to his left and sees Baker Joughin, 
               crouching on the hull, holding onto the railing. It is a 
               surreal moment.

                                     JOUGHIN
                              (nodding a greeting)
                         Helluva night.

               The final relentless plunge begins as the stern section 
               floods. Looking down a hundred feet to the water, we drop 
               like an elevator with Jack and Rose.

                                     JACK
                              (talking fast)
                         Take a deep breath and hold it right 
                         before we go into the water. The 
                         ship will suck us down. Kick for the 
                         surface and keep kicking. Don't let 
                         go of my hand. We're gonna make it 
                         Rose. Trust me.

               She stares at the water coming up at them, and grips his 
               hand harder.

                                     ROSE
                         I trust you.

               Below them the poop deck is disappearing. The plunge gathers 
               speed... the boiling surface engulfs the docking bridge and 
               then rushes up the last thirty feet.

               IN A HIGH SHOT

               We see the stern descend into the boiling sea. The name 
               "TITANIC" disappears, and the tiny figures of Jack and Rose 
               vanish under the water.

               Where the ship stood, now there is nothing. Only the black 
               ocean.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. OCEAN / UNDERWATER AND SURFACE

               Bodies are whirled and spun, some limp as dolls, others 
               struggling spasmodically, as the vortex sucks them down and 
               tumbles them.

               Jack rises INTO FRAME F.G. kicking hard for the surface... 
               holding tightly to Rose, pulling her up.

               AT THE SURFACE

               A roiling chaos of screaming, thrashing people. Over a 
               thousand people are now floating where the ship went down. 
               Some are stunned, gasping for breath. Others are crying, 
               praying, moaning, shouting... screaming.

               Jack and Rose surface among them. They barely have time to 
               gasp for air before people are clawing at them. People driven 
               insane by the water, 4 degrees below freezing, a cold so 
               intense it is indistinguishable form death by fire.

               A man pushes Rose under, trying to climb on top of her... 
               senselessly trying to get out of the water, to climb onto 
               anything. Jack PUNCHES him repeatedly, pulling her free.

                                     JACK
                         Swim, Rose! SWIM!

               She tries, but her strokes are not as effective as his because 
               of her life jacket. They break out of the clot of people. He 
               has to find some kind of flotation, anything to get her out 
               of the freezing water.

                                     JACK
                         Keep swimming. Keep moving. Come on, 
                         you can do it.

               All about them there is a tremendous wailing, screaming and 
               moaning... a chorus of tormented souls. And beyond that... 
               nothing but black water stretching to the horizon. The sense 
               of isolation and hopelessness is overwhelming.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. OCEAN

               Jack strokes rhythmically, the effort keeping him from 
               freezing.

                                     JACK
                         Look for something floating. Some 
                         debris... wood... anything.

                                     ROSE
                         It's so cold.

                                     JACK
                         I know. I know. Help me, here. Look 
                         around.

               His words keep her focused, taking her mind off the wailing 
               around them. Rose scans the water, panting, barely able to 
               draw a breath. She turns and... SCREAMS.

               A DEVIL is right in from of her face. It is the black FRENCH 
               BULLDOG, swimming right at her like a seamonster in the 
               darkness, its coal eyes bugging. It motors past her, like it 
               is headed for Newfoundland.

               Beyond it Rose sees something in the water.

                                     ROSE
                         What's that?

               Jack sees what she is pointing to, and they make for it 
               together. It is a piece of wooden debris, intricately carved. 
               He pushes her up and she slithers onto it belly down.

               But when Jack tries to get up onto the thing, it tilts and 
               submerges, almost dumping Rose off. It is clearly only big 
               enough to support her. He clings to it, close to her, keeping 
               his upper body out of the water as best he can.

               Their breath floats around them in a cloud as they pant from 
               exertion. A MAN swims toward them, homing in on the piece of 
               debris. Jack warns him back.

                                     JACK
                         It's just enough for this lady... 
                         you'll push it under.

                                     MAN
                         Let me try at least, or I'll die 
                         soon.

                                     JACK
                         You'll die quicker if you come any 
                         closer.

                                     MAN
                         Yes, I see. Good luck to you then.
                              (swimming off)
                         God bless.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. COLLAPSIBLE A / OCEAN

               The boat is overloaded and half-flooded. Men cling to the 
               sides in the water. Others, swimming, are drawn to it as 
               their only hope. Cal, standing in the boat, slaps his oar in 
               the water as a warning.

                                     CAL
                         Stay back! Keep off!

               Fabrizio, exhausted and near the limit, makes it almost to 
               the boat. Cal CLUBS HIM with the oar, cutting open his scalp.

                                     FABRIZIO
                         You don't... understand... I have... 
                         to get... to America.

                                     CAL
                              (pointing with the 
                              oar)
                         It's that way!

               CLOSE ON FABRIZIO

               As he floats, panting each breath agony. You see the spirit 
               leave him.

               FABRIZIO'S POV

               Cal in SLOW MOTION, yelling and wielding the oar. A demon in 
               a tuxedo. The image fades to black.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. OCEAN

               JACK AND ROSE

               Still float amid a chorus of the damned. Jack sees the ship's 
               officer nearby, CHIEF OFFICER WILDE. He is blowing his whistle 
               furiously, knowing the sound will carry over the water for 
               miles.

                                     JACK
                         The boats will come back for us, 
                         Rose. Hold on just a little longer. 
                         They had to row away for the suction 
                         and now they'll be coming back.

               She nods, his words helping her. She is shivering 
               uncontrollably, her lips blue and her teeth chattering.

                                     ROSE
                         Thank God for you Jack.

               People are still screaming, calling to the lifeboats.

                                     WOMAN
                         Come back! Please! We know you can 
                         hear us. For God's sake!

                                     MAN
                         Please... help us. Save one life! 
                         SAVE ONE LIFE!

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. LIFEBOATS / OCEAN

               IN BOAT 6

               Ruth has her ears covered against the wailing in the darkness. 
               The first class women in the boat sit, stunned, listening to 
               the sounds of hundreds screaming.

                                     HITCHINS
                         They'll pull us right down I tell 
                         ya!

                                     MOLLY
                         Aw knock it off, yer scarin' me. 
                         Come on girls, grab your oars. Let's 
                         go.
                              (nobody moves)
                         Well come on!

               The women won't meet her eyes. They huddle into their ermine 
               wraps.

                                     MOLLY
                         I don't understand a one of you. 
                         What's the matter with you? It's 
                         your men back there! We got plenty 
                         a' room for more.

                                     HITCHINS
                         If you don't shut that hole in yer 
                         face, there'll be one less in this 
                         boat!

               Ruth keeps her ears covered and her eyes closed, shutting it 
               all out.

               IN BOAT ONE

               Sir Cosmo and Lucile Duff-Gordon sit with ten other people 
               in a boat that is two thirds empty. They are two hundred 
               yards from the screaming in the darkness.

                                     FIREMAN HENDRICKSON
                         We should do something.

               Lucile squeezes Cosmo's hand and pleads him with her eyes. 
               She is terrified.

                                     SIR COSMO
                         It's out of the question.

               The crewmembers, intimidated by a nobleman, acquiesce. They 
               hunch guiltily, hoping the sound will stop soon.

               TWENTY BOATS, most half full, float in the darkness. None of 
               them make a move.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. OCEAN

               Jack and Rose drift under the blazing stars. The water is 
               glassy, with only the faintest undulating swell. Rose can 
               actually see the stars reflecting on the black mirror of the 
               sea.

               Jack squeezes the water out of her long coat, tucking it in 
               tightly around her legs. He rubs her arms. His face is chalk 
               with in the darkness. A low MOANING in the darkness around 
               them.

                                     ROSE
                         It's getting quiet.

                                     JACK
                         Just a few more minutes. It'll take 
                         them a while to get the boats 
                         organized...

               Rose is unmoving, just staring into space. She knows the 
               truth. There won't be any boats. Behind Jack she sees that 
               Officer Wilde has stopped moving. He is slumped in his 
               lifejacket, looking almost asleep. He has died of exposure 
               already.

                                     JACK
                         I don't know about you, but I intend 
                         to write a strongly worded letter to 
                         the White Star Line about all this.

               She laughs weakly, but it sounds like a gasp of fear. Rose 
               finds his eyes in the dim light.

                                     ROSE
                         I love you Jack.

               He takes her hand.

                                     JACK
                         No... don't say your good-byes, Rose. 
                         Don't you give up. Don't do it.

                                     ROSE
                         I'm so cold.

                                     JACK
                         You're going to get out of this... 
                         you're going to go on and you're 
                         going to make babies and watch them 
                         grow and you're going to die an old 
                         lady, warm in your bed. Not here. 
                         Not this night. Do you understand 
                         me?

                                     ROSE
                         I can't feel my body.

                                     JACK
                         Rose, listen to me. Listen. Winning 
                         that ticket was the best thing that 
                         ever happened to me.

               Jack is having trouble getting the breath to speak.

                                     JACK
                         It brought me to you. And I'm 
                         thankful, Rose. I'm thankful.

               His voice is trembling with the cold which is working its 
               way to his heart. But his eyes are unwavering.

                                     JACK
                         You must do me this honor... promise 
                         me you will survive... that you will 
                         never give up... no matter what 
                         happens... no matter how hopeless... 
                         promise me now, and never let go of 
                         that promise.

                                     ROSE
                         I promise.

                                     JACK
                         Never let go.

                                     ROSE
                         I promise. I will never let go, Jack. 
                         I'll never let go.

               She grips his hand and they lie with their heads together. 
               It is quiet now, except for the lapping of the water.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. LIFEBOATS / OCEAN - NIGHT

               Fifth Officer Lowe, the impetuous young Welshman, has gotten 
               Boats 10, 12 and Collapsible D together with his own Boat 
               14. A demon of energy, he's had everyone hold the boats 
               together and is transferring passengers from 14 into the 
               others, to empty his boat for a rescue attempt.

               As the women step gingerly across the other boats, Lowe sees 
               a shawled figure in too much of a hurry. He rips the shawl 
               off, and finds himself staring into the face of a man. He 
               angrily shoves the stowaway into another boat and turns to 
               his crew of three.

                                     LOWE
                         Right, man the oars.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. OCEAN / BOAT

               The beam of an electric torch plays across the water like a 
               searchlight as boat 14 comes toward us.

               ANGLE FROM THE BOAT

               As the torch illuminates floating debris, a poignant trail 
               of flotsam: a violin, a child's wooden soldier, a framed 
               photo of a steerage family. Daniel Marvin's wooden Biograph 
               camera.

               Then, their white lifebelts bobbing in the darkness like 
               sign posts, the first bodies come into the torch's beam. The 
               people are dead but not drowned, killed by the freezing water. 
               Some look like they could be sleeping. Others stare with 
               frozen eyes at the stars.

               Soon bodies are so thick the seamen cannot row. They hit the 
               oars on the heads of floating men and women... a wooden thunk. 
               One seaman throws up. Lowe sees a mother floating with her 
               arms frozen around her lifeless baby.

                                     LOWE
                              (the worst moment of 
                              his life)
                         We waited too long.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. OCEAN

               IN A HOVERING DOWNANGLE we see Jack and Rose floating in the 
               black water. The stars reflect in the mill pond surface, and 
               the two of them seem to be floating in interstellar space. 
               They are absolutely still. Their hands are locked together. 
               Rose is staring upwards at the canopy of stars wheeling above 
               her. The music is transparent, floating... as the long sleep 
               steals over Rose, and she feels peace.

               CLOSE ON ROSE'S FACE

               Pale, like the faces of the dead. She seems to be floating 
               in a void. Rose is in a semi-hallucinatory state. She knows 
               she is dying. Her lips barely move as she sings a scrap of 
               Jack's song:

                                     ROSE
                         "Come Josephine in my flying 
                         machine..."

               ROSE'S POV

               The stars. Like you've never seen them. The Milky Way a 
               glorious band from horizon to horizon.

               A SHOOTING STAR flares... a line of light across the heavens.

               TIGHT ON ROSE AGAIN

               We see that her hair is dusted with frost crystals. Her 
               breathing is so shallow, she is almost motionless. Her eyes 
               track down from the stars to the water.

               ROSE'S POV - SLOW MOTION

               The silhouette of a boat crossing the stars. She sees men in 
               it, rowing so slowly the oars lift out of the syrupy water, 
               leaving weightless pearls floating in the air. The VOICES of 
               the men sound slow and DISTORTED.

               Then the lookout flashes his torch toward her and the light 
               flares across the water, silhouetting the bobbing corpses in 
               between. It flicks past her motionless form and moves on. 
               The boat is 50 feet away, and moving past her. The men look 
               away.

               Rose lifts her head to turn to Jack. We see that her hair 
               has frozen to the wood under her.

                                     ROSE
                              (barely audible)
                         Jack.

               She touches his shoulder with her free hand. He doesn't 
               respond. Rose gently turns his face toward her. It is rimed 
               with frost.

               He seems to be sleeping peacefully.

               But he is not asleep.

               Rose can only stare at his still face as the realization 
               goes through her.

                                     ROSE
                         Oh, Jack.

               All hope, will and spirit leave her. She looks at the boat. 
               It is further away now, the voices fainter. Rose watches 
               them go.

               She closes her eyes. She is so weak, and there just seems to 
               be no reason to even try.

               And then... her eyes snap open.

               She raises her head suddenly, cracking the ice as she rips 
               her hair off the wood. She calls out, but her voice is so 
               weak they don't hear her. The boat is invisible now, the 
               torch light a star impossibly far away. She struggles to 
               draw breath, calling again.

               IN THE BOAT

               Lowe hears nothing behind him. He points to something ahead, 
               turning the tiller.

               ROSE

               Struggles to move. Her hand, she realizes, is actually frozen 
               to Jack's. She breaths on it, melting the ice a little, and 
               gently unclasps their hands, breaking away a thin tinkling 
               film.

                                     ROSE
                         I won't let go. I promise.

               She releases him and he sinks into the black water. He seems 
               to fade out like a spirit returning to some immaterial plane.

               Rose rolls off the floating staircase and plunges into the 
               icy water. She swims to Chief Officer Wilde's body and grabs 
               his whistle. She starts to BLOW THE WHISTLE with all the 
               strength in her body. Its sound slaps across the still water.

               IN BOAT 14

               Lowe whips around at the sound of the whistle.

                                     LOWE
                              (turning the tiller)
                         Row back! That way! Pull!

               Rose keeps blowing as the boat comes to her. She is still 
               blowing when Lowe takes the whistle from her mouth as they 
               haul her into the boat. She slips into unconsciousness and 
               they scramble to cover her with blankets...

                                                               DISSOLVE TO:

               INT. IMAGING SHACK / KELDYSH

               EXTREME CLOSEUP of Rose's ancient, wrinkled face. Present 
               day.

                                     OLD ROSE
                         Fifteen hundred people went into the 
                         sea when Titanic sank from under us. 
                         There were twenty boats floating 
                         nearby and only one came back. One. 
                         Six were saved from the water, myself 
                         included. Six out of fifteen hundred.

               As she speaks THE CAMERA TRACKS slowly across the faces of 
               Lizzy and the salvage crew on Keldysh. Lovett, Bodine, Buell, 
               the others... the reality of what happened here 84 years 
               before has hit them like never before. With her story Rose 
               has put them on Titanic in its final hours, and or the first 
               time, they do feel like graverobbers.

               Lovett, for the first time, has even forgotten to ask about 
               the diamond.

                                     OLD ROSE
                         Afterward, the seven hundred people 
                         in the boats had nothing to do but 
                         wait... wait to die, wait to live, 
                         wait for an absolution which would 
                         never come.

                                                               DISSOLVE TO:

               EXT. LIFEBOATS / OPEN SEA - PRE-DAWN

               MATCHING MOVE as the camera tracks along the faces of the 
               saved.

                                                               DISSOLVE TO:

               ANOTHER BOAT

               And then ANOTHER, seeing faces we know among the survivors: 
               Ismay in a trance, just staring and trembling... Cal, sipping 
               from a hip flask offered to him by a black-faced stoker... 
               Ruth hugging herself, rocking gently.

               IN BOAT 14

               CLOSE ON ROSE

               Lying swaddled. Only her face is visible, white as the moon. 
               The man next to her jumps up, pointing and yelling. Soon 
               everyone is looking and shouting excitedly. In Rose's POV it 
               is all silent, SLOW MOTION.

               IN SLOW-MOTION SILENCE

               We see Lowe light a green flare and wave it as everyone shouts 
               and cheers. Rose doesn't react. She floats beyond all human 
               emotion.

                                                               DISSOLVE TO:

               EXT. LIFEBOATS / OPEN SEA - DAWN

               Golden light washes across the white boats, which gloat in a 
               calm sea reflecting the rosy sky. All around them, like a 
               flotilla of sailing ships, are icebergs. The CARPATHIA sits 
               nearby, as boats row toward her.

                                                               DISSOLVE TO:

               EXT. LIFEBOATS / OCEAN / CARPATHIA MONTAGE - DAY

               IMAGES DISSOLVE into one another: a ship's hull looming, 
               with the letters "CARPATHIA" visible on the bow... Rose 
               watching, rocked by the sea, her face blank... seamen helping 
               survivors up the rope ladder to the Carpathia's gangway 
               doors... two women crying and hugging each other inside the 
               ship... ALL SILENT, ALL IN SLOW-MOTION. There is just music, 
               so gentle and sad, part elegy, part hymn, part aching song 
               of love lost forever.

               THE IMAGES CONTINUE to music... Rose, outside of time, outside 
               of herself, coming into Carpathia, barely able to stand... 
               Rose being draped with warm blankets and given hot tea... 
               Bruce Ismay climbing aboard. He has the face and eyes of a 
               damned soul.

               As Ismay walks along the hall, guided by a crewman toward 
               the doctor's cabin, he passes rows of seated and standing 
               widows. He must run the gauntlet of their accusing gazes.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. DECK / CARPATHIA - DAY

               It is the afternoon of the 15th. Cal is searching the faces 
               of the widows lining the deck, looking for Rose. The deck of 
               Carpathia is crammed with huddled people, and even the 
               recovered lifeboats of Titanic. On a hatch cover sits an 
               enormous pile of lifebelts.

               He keeps walking toward the stern. Seeing Cal's tuxedo, a 
               steward approaches him.

                                     CARPATHIA STEWARD
                         You won't find any of your people 
                         back here, sir. It's all steerage.

               Cal ignores him and goes amongst this wrecked group, looking 
               under shawls and blankets at one bleak face after another.

               Rose is sipping hot tea. Her eyes focus on him as he 
               approaches her. He barely recognizes her. She looks like a 
               refugee, her matted hair hanging in her eyes.

                                     ROSE
                         Yes, I lived. How awkward for you.

                                     CAL
                         Rose... your mother and I have been 
                         looking for you --

               She holds up her hand, stopping him.

                                     ROSE
                         Please don't. Don't talk. Just listen. 
                         We will make a deal, since that is 
                         something you understand. From this 
                         moment you do not exist for me, nor 
                         I for you. You shall not see me again. 
                         And you will not attempt to find me. 
                         In return I will keep my silence. 
                         Your actions last night need never 
                         come to light, and you will get to 
                         keep the honor you have carefully 
                         purchased.

               She fixes him with a glare as cold and hard as the ice which 
               changed their lives.

                                     ROSE
                         Is this in any way unclear?

                                     CAL
                              (after a long beat)
                         What do I tell your mother?

                                     ROSE
                         Tell her that her daughter died with 
                         the Titanic.

               She stands, turning to the rail. Dismissing him. We see Cal 
               stricken with emotion.

                                     CAL
                         You're precious to me, Rose.

                                     ROSE
                         Jewels are precious. Goodbye, Mr. 
                         Hockley.

               We see that in his way, the only way he knows, he does truly 
               love her.

               After a moment, he turns and walks away.

                                     OLD ROSE (V.O.)
                         That was the last time I ever saw 
                         him. He married, of course, and 
                         inherited his millions. The crash of 
                         28 hit his interests hard, and he 
                         put a pistol in his mouth that year. 
                         His children fought over the scraps 
                         of his estate like hyenas, or so I 
                         read.

               ANGLE ON ROSE

               At the railing of the Carpathia, 9pm April 18th. She gazes 
               up at the Statue of Liberty, looking just as it does today, 
               welcoming her home with her glowing torch. It is just as 
               Fabrizio saw it, so clearly, in his mind.

               LATER CARPATHIA DISGORGES THE SURVIVORS

               At the Cunard pier, Pier 54. Over 30,000 people line the 
               dock and fill the surrounding streets. The magnesium flashes 
               of the photographers go off like small bombs, lighting an 
               amazing tableau.

               Several hundred police keep the mob back. The dock is packed 
               with friends and relatives, officials, ambulances, and the 
               press --

               Reporters and photographers swarm everywhere... 6 deep at 
               the foot of the gangways, lining the tops of cars and 
               trucks... it is the 1912 equivalent of a media circus. They 
               jostle to get close to the survivors, tugging on them as 
               they pass and shouting over each other to ask them questions.

               Rose is covered with a woolen shawl and walking with a group 
               of steerage passengers. Immigration officers are asking them 
               questions as they come off the gangway.

                                     IMMIGRATION OFFICER
                         Name?

                                     ROSE
                         Dawson. Rose Dawson.

               The officer steers her toward a holding area for processing. 
               Rose walks forward with the dazed immigrants. The BOOM! of 
               photographer's magnesium flashes cause them to flinch, and 
               the glare is blinding. There is a sudden disturbance near 
               her as two men burst through the cordon, running to embrace 
               an older woman along the survivors, who cries out with joy. 
               The reporters converge on this emotional scene, and flashes 
               explode.

               Rose uses this moment to slip away into the crowd. She pushes 
               through the jostling people, moving with purpose, and none 
               challenges her in the confusion.

                                     OLD ROSE (V.O.)
                         Can you exchange one life for another? 
                         A caterpillar turns into a butterfly. 
                         If a mindless insect can do it, why 
                         couldn't I? Was it any more 
                         unimaginable than the sinking of the 
                         Titanic?

               TRACKING WITH HER as she walks away, further and further 
               until she flashes and the roar are far behind her, and she 
               is still walking, determined.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. IMAGING SHACK / KELDYSH

               Old Rose sits with the group in the Imaging Shack, lit by 
               the blue glow of the screens. She holds the haircomb with 
               the jade butterfly on the handle in her gnarled hands.

                                     BODINE
                         We never found anything on Jack. 
                         There's no record of him at all.

                                     OLD ROSE
                         No, there wouldn't be, would there? 
                         And I've never spoken of him until 
                         now, not to anyone.
                              (to Lizzy)
                         Not even your grandfather. A woman's 
                         heart is a deep ocean of secrets. 
                         But now you all know there was a man 
                         named Jack Dawson, and that he saved 
                         me, in every way that a person can 
                         be saved.
                              (closing her eyes)
                         I don't even have a picture of him. 
                         He exists now only in my memory.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. OCEAN FLOOR / TITANIC WRECK

               The Mir submersibles make their last pass over the ship. We 
               hear Yuri the pilot on the UQC:

                                     YURI
                         Mir One returning to surface.

               The sub rises off the deck of the wreck, taking its light 
               with it, leaving the Titanic once again it its fine and 
               private darkness.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. KELDYSH DECK

               A desultory wrap party for the expedition is in progress. 
               There is music and some of the (co-ed) Russian crew are 
               dancing. Bodine is getting drunk in the aggressive style of 
               Baker Joughin.

               Lovett stands at the rail, looking down into the black water. 
               Lizzy comes to him, offering him a beer. She puts her hand 
               on his arm.

                                     LIZZY
                         I'm sorry.

                                     LOVETT
                         We were pissin' in the wind the whole 
                         time.

               Lovett notices a figure move through the lights far down at 
               the stern of the ship.

                                     LOVETT
                         Oh shit.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               EXT. KELDYSH STERN DECK

               Rose walks through the shadows of the deck machinery. Her 
               nightgown blows in the wind. Her feet are bare. Her hands 
               are clutched at her chest, almost as if she is praying.

               ON LOVETT AND LIZZY

               Running down the stairs from the top deck, hauling ass.

               ROSE

               Reaches the stern rail. Her gnarled fingers wrap over the 
               rail. Her ancient foot steps up on the gunwale. She pushes 
               herself up, leaning forward. Over her shoulder, we see the 
               black water glinting far below.

               LOVETT AND LIZZY

               Run up behind her.

                                     LIZZY
                         Grandma, wait!! Don't --

               Rose turns her head.

               Looking at them. She turns further, and we see she has 
               something in her hand, something she was about to drop 
               overboard.

               It is the "Heart of the Ocean".

               Lovett sees his holy grail in her hand and his eyes go wide. 
               Rose keeps it over the railing where she can drop it anytime.

                                     ROSE
                         Don't come any closer.

                                     LOVETT
                         You had it the entire time?!

                                                              FLASH CUT TO:

               SILENT IMAGE OF YOUNG ROSE

               Walking away from Pier 54. The photographers' flashes go off 
               like a battle behind her. She has her hands in her pockets. 
               She stops, feeling something, and pulls out the necklace. 
               She stares at it in amazement.

               BACK ON KELDYSH

               Rose smiles at Brock's incomprehension.

                                     ROSE
                         The hardest part about being so poor, 
                         was being so rich. But every time I 
                         though of selling it, I though of 
                         Cal. And somehow I always got by 
                         without his help.

               She holds it out over the water. Bodine and a couple of the 
               other guys come up behind Lovett, reacting to what is in 
               Rose's hand.

                                     BODINE
                         Holy shit.

                                     LOVETT
                         Don't drop it Rose.

                                     BODINE
                              (a fierce whisper)
                         Rush her.

                                     LOVETT
                              (to Bodine)
                         It's hers, you schmuck.
                              (to her)
                         Look, Rose, I... I don't know what 
                         to say to a woman who tries to jump 
                         off the Titanic when it's not sinking, 
                         and jumps back onto it when it is... 
                         we're not dealing with logic here, I 
                         know that... but please... think 
                         about this a second.

                                     ROSE
                         I have. I came all the way here so 
                         this could go back where it belongs.

               The massive diamond glitters. Brock edges closer and holds 
               out his hand...

                                     LOVETT
                         Just let me hold it in my hand, Rose. 
                         Please. Just once.

               He comes closer to her. It is reminiscent of Jack slowly 
               moving up to her at the stern of Titanic.

               Surprisingly, she calmly places the massive stone in the 
               palm of his hand, while still holding onto the necklace. 
               Lovett gazes at the object of his quest. An infinity of cold 
               scalpels glint in its blue depths. It is mesmerizing. It 
               fits in his hand just like he imagined.

                                     LOVETT
                         My God.

               His grip tightens on the diamond.

               He looks up, meeting her gaze. Her eyes are suddenly 
               infinitely wise and deep.

                                     ROSE
                         You look for treasures in the wrong 
                         place, Mr. Lovett. Only life is 
                         priceless, and making each day count.

               His fingers relax. He opens them slowly. Gently she slips 
               the diamond out of his hand. He feels it sliding away.

               Then, with an impish little grin, Rose tosses the necklace 
               over the rail. Lovett gives a strangled cry and rushes to 
               the rail in time to see it hit the water and disappear 
               forever.

                                     BODINE
                         Aww!! That really sucks, lady!

               Brock Lovett goes through ten changes before he settles on a 
               reaction... HE LAUGHS. He laughs until the tears come to his 
               eyes. Then he turns to Lizzy.

                                     LOVETT
                         Would you like to dance?

               Lizzy grins at him and nods. Rose smiles. She looks up at 
               the stars.

               IN THE BLACK HEART OF THE OCEAN

               The diamond sinks, twinkling end over end, into the infinite 
               depths.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               INT. ROSE'S CABIN / KELDYSH

               A GRACEFUL PAN across Rose's shelf of carefully arranged 
               pictures:

               Rose as a young actress in California, radiant... a 
               theatrically lit studio publicity shot... Rose and her 
               husband, with their two children... Rose with her son at his 
               college graduation... Rose with her children and grandchildren 
               at her 70th birthday. A collage of images of a life lived 
               well.

               THE PAN STOPS on an image filling frame. Rose, circa 1920. 
               She is at the beach, sitting on a horse at the surfline. The 
               Santa Monica pier, with its rollercoaster is behind her. She 
               is grinning, full of life.

               WE PAN OFF the last picture to Rose herself, warm in her 
               bunk. A profile shot. She is very still. She could be 
               sleeping, or maybe something else.

                                                                    CUT TO:

               BLACKNESS

               THE WRECK OF TITANIC looms like a ghost out of the dark. It 
               is lit by a kind of moonlight, a light of the mind. We pass 
               over the endless forecastle deck to the superstructure, moving 
               faster than subs can move... almost like we are flying.

               WE GO INSIDE

               And the echoing sound of distant waltz music is heard. The 
               rust fades away from the walls of the dark corridor and it 
               is transformed... We EMERGE onto the grand staircase, lit by 
               glowing chandelier. The music is vibrant now, and the room 
               is populated by men in tie and tails, women in gowns. It is 
               exquisitely beautiful.

               IN POV

               We sweep down the staircase. The crowd of beautiful gentlemen 
               and ladies turn as we descend toward them. At the bottom a 
               man stands with his back to us... he turns and it is Jack. 
               Smiling he holds his hand out toward us.

               IN A SIDE ANGLE

               Rose goes into his arms, a girl of 17. The passengers, 
               officers and crew of the RMS Titanic smile and applaud in 
               the utter silence of the abyss.

                                                                  FADE OUT:

                                         THE END
